

PART ONE
HEIR OF THE
SURVIVOR
I write these
words in steel, for anything not set in metal cannot be trusted.





1
THE ARMY CREPT LIKE
A dark stain across the horizon.
King Elend Venture
stood motionless upon the Luthadel city wall, looking out at the
enemy troops. Around him, ash fell from the sky in fat, lazy flakes.
It wasn't the burnt white ash that one saw in dead coals; this was a
deeper, harsher black ash. The Ashmounts had been particularly active
lately.
Elend felt the ash
dust his face and clothing, but he ignored it. In the distance, the
bloody red sun was close to setting. It backlit the army that had
come to take Elend's kingdom from him.
"How many?"
Elend asked quietly.
"Fifty
thousand, we think," Ham said, leaning against the parapet,
beefy arms folded on the stone. Like everything in the city, the wall
had been stained black by countless years of ashfalls.
"Fifty
thousand soldiers . . . " Elend said, trailing off. Despite
heavy recruitment, Elend barely had twenty thousand men under his
command—and they were peasants with less than a year of
training. Maintaining even that small number was straining his
resources. If they'd been able to find the Lord Ruler's atium,
perhaps things would be different. As it was, Elend's rule was in
serious danger of economic disaster.
"What do you
think?" Elend asked.
"I don't know,
El," Ham said quietly. "Kelsier was always the one with the
vision."
"But you
helped him plan," Elend said. "You and the others, you were
his crew. You were the ones who came up with a strategy for
overthrowing the empire, then made it happen."
Ham fell silent,
and Elend felt as if he knew what the man was thinking. Kelsier
was central to it all. He was the one who organized, the one who took
all of the wild brain-storming and turned it into a viable operation.
He was the leader. The genius.
And he'd died a
year before, on the very same day that the people—as part of
his secret plan—had risen up in fury to overthrow their god
emperor. Elend had taken the throne in the ensuing chaos. Now it was
looking more and more like he would lose everything that Kelsier and
his crew had worked so hard to accomplish. Lose it to a tyrant who
might be even worse than the Lord Ruler. A petty, devious bully in
"noble" form. The man who had marched his army on Luthadel.
Elend's own father,
Straff Venture.
"Any chance
you can . . . talk him out of attacking?" Ham asked.
"Maybe,"
Elend said hesitantly. "Assuming the Assembly doesn't just
surrender the city."
"They close?"
"I don't know,
honestly. I worry that they are. That army has frightened them, Ham."
And with good reason, he thought. "Anyway, I have a
proposal for the meeting in two days. I'll try to talk them out of
doing anything rash. Dockson got back today, right?"
Ham nodded. "Just
before the army's advance."
"I think we
should call a meeting of the crew," Elend said. "See if we
can come up with a way out of this."
"We'll still
be pretty shorthanded," Ham said, rubbing his chin. "Spook
isn't supposed to be back for another week, and the Lord Ruler only
knows where Breeze went. We haven't had a message from him in
months."
Elend sighed,
shaking his head. "I can't think of anything else, Ham." He
turned, staring out over the ashen landscape again. The army was
lighting campfires as the sun set. Soon, the mists would appear.
I need to get
back to the palace and work on that proposal, Elend thought.
"Where'd Vin
run off to?" Ham asked, turning back to Elend.
Elend paused. "You
know," he said, "I'm not sure."
Vin landed softly
on the damp cobblestones, watching as the mists began to form around
her. They puffed into existence as darkness fell, growing like
tangles of translucent vines, twisting and wrapping around one
another.
The great city of
Luthadel was still. Even now, a year after the Lord Ruler's death and
the rise of Elend's new free government, the common people stayed in
their homes at night. They feared the mists, a tradition that went
far deeper than the Lord Ruler's laws.
Vin slipped forward
quietly, senses alert. Inside herself, as always, she burned tin and
pewter. Tin enhanced her senses, making it easier for her to see in
the night. Pewter made her body stronger, made her lighter on her
feet. These, along with copper—which had the power to hide her
use of Allomancy from others who were burning bronze—were
metals that she left on almost all the time.
Some called her
paranoid. She thought herself prepared. Either way, the habit had
saved her life on numerous occasions.
She approached a
quiet street corner and paused, peeking out. She'd never really
understood how she burned metals; she could remember doing it
for as long as she'd been alive, using Allomancy instinctively even
before she was formally trained by Kelsier. It didn't really matter
to her. She wasn't like Elend; she didn't need a logical explanation
for everything. For Vin, it was enough that when she swallowed bits
of metal, she was able to draw upon their power.
Power she
appreciated, for she well knew what it was like to lack it. Even now,
she was not what one would likely envision as a warrior. Slight of
frame and barely five feet tall, with dark hair and pale skin, she
knew she had an almost frail look about her. She no longer displayed
the underfed look she had during her childhood on the streets, but
she certainly wasn't someone any man would find intimidating.
She liked that. It
gave her an edge—and she needed every edge she could get.
She also liked the
night. During the day, Luthadel was cramped and confining despite its
size. But at night the mists fell like a deep cloud. They dampened,
softened, shaded. Massive keeps became shadowed mountains, and
crowded tenements melted together like a chandler's rejected wares.
Vin crouched beside
her building, still watching the intersection. Carefully, she reached
within herself and burned steel—one of the other metals she'd
swallowed earlier. Immediately, a group of translucent blue lines
sprang up around her. Visible only to her eyes, the lines pointed
from her chest to nearby sources of metal—all metals, no matter
what type. The thickness of the lines was proportionate to the size
of the metal pieces they met. Some pointed to bronze door latches,
others to crude iron nails holding boards together.
She waited
silently. None of the lines moved. Burning steel was an easy way to
tell if someone was moving nearby. If they were wearing bits of
metal, they would trail telltale moving lines of blue. Of course,
that wasn't the main purpose of steel. Vin reached her hand carefully
into her belt pouch and pulled out one of the many coins that sat
within, muffled by cloth batting. Like all other bits of metal, this
coin had a blue line extending from its center to Vin's chest.
She flipped the
coin into the air, then mentally grabbed its line and—burning
steel—Pushed on the coin. The bit of metal shot into the air,
arcing through the mists, forced away by the Push. It plinked to the
ground in the middle of the street.
The mists continued
to spin. They were thick and mysterious, even to Vin. More dense than
a simple fog and more constant than any normal weather pattern, they
churned and flowed, making rivulets around her. Her eyes could pierce
them; tin made her sight more keen. The night seemed lighter to her,
the mists less thick. Yet, they were still there.
A shadow moved in
the city square, responding to her coin—which she had Pushed
out into the square as a signal. Vin crept forward, and recognized
OreSeur the kandra. He wore a different body than he had a year ago,
during the days when he had acted the part of Lord Renoux. Yet, this
balding, nondescript body had now become just as familiar to Vin.
OreSeur met up with
her. "Did you find what you were looking for, Mistress?" he
asked, tone respectful—yet somehow still a little hostile. As
always.
Vin shook her head,
glancing around in the darkness. "Maybe I was wrong," she
said. "Maybe I wasn't being followed." The
acknowledgment made her a bit sad. She'd been looking forward to
sparring with the Watcher again tonight. She still didn't even know
who he was; the first night, she'd mistaken him for an assassin. And
maybe he was. Yet, he seemed to display very little interest in
Elend—and a whole lot of interest in Vin.
"We should go
back to the wall," Vin decided, standing up. "Elend will be
wondering where I went."
OreSeur nodded. At
that moment, a burst of coins shot through the mists, spraying toward
Vin.
I have begun to
wonder if I am the only sane man left. Can the others not see? They
have been waiting so long for their hero to come—the one spoken
of in Terris prophecies—that they quickly jump between
conclusions, presuming that each story and legend applies to this one
man.





2
VIN REACTED
IMMEDIATELY, SPRINGING AWAY. She moved with incredible speed,
tasseled cloak swirling as she skidded across the wet cobblestones.
The coins hit the ground behind her, throwing up chips of stone, then
leaving trails in the mist as they ricocheted away.
"OreSeur, go!"
she snapped, though he was already fleeing toward a nearby alleyway.
Vin spun into a low
crouch, hands and feet on the cool stones, Allomantic metals flaring
in her stomach. She burned steel, watching the translucent blue lines
appear around her. She waited, tense, watching for . . .
Another group of
coins shot from the dark mists, each one trailing a blue line. Vin
immediately flared steel and Pushed against the coins, deflecting
them out into the darkness.
The night fell
still again.
The street around
her was wide—for Luthadel—though tenements rose high on
either side. Mist spun lazily, making the ends of the street
disappear into a haze.
A group of eight
men appeared from the mists and approached. Vin smiled. She had
been right: Someone was following her. These men weren't, however,
the Watcher. They didn't have his solid grace, his sense of power.
These men were something far more blunt. Assassins.
It made sense. If
she had just arrived with an army to conquer Luthadel, the
first thing she'd have done was send in a group of Allomancers to
kill Elend.
She felt a sudden
pressure at her side, and she cursed as she was thrown off balance,
her coin pouch jerking away from her waist. She ripped its string
free, letting the enemy Allomancer Push the coins away from her. The
assassins had at least one Coinshot—a Misting who had the power
to burn steel and Push on metals. In fact, two of the assassins
trailed blue lines pointing to coin pouches of their own. Vin
considered returning the favor and Pushing their pouches away, but
hesitated. No need to play her hand yet. She might need those coins.
Without coins of
her own, she couldn't attack from a distance. However, if this was a
good team, then attacking from a distance would be pointless—their
Coinshots and Lurchers would be ready to deal with shot coins.
Fleeing wasn't an option either. These men hadn't come for her alone;
if she fled, they'd continue on to their real goal.
Nobody sent
assassins to kill bodyguards. Assassins killed important men. Men
like Elend Venture, king of the Central Dominance. The man she loved.
Vin flared
pewter—body growing tense, alert, dangerous. Four Thugs at
the front, she thought, eyeing the advancing men. The pewter
burners would be inhumanly strong, capable of surviving a great deal
of physical punishment. Very dangerous up close. And the one
carrying the wooden shield is a Lurcher.
She feinted
forward, causing the approaching Thugs to jump backward. Eight
Mistings against one Mistborn was decent odds for them—but only
if they were careful. The two Coinshots moved up the sides of the
street, so that they'd be able to Push at her from both directions.
The last man, standing quietly beside the Lurcher, had to be a
Smoker—relatively unimportant in a fight, his purpose was to
hide his team from enemy Allomancers.
Eight Mistings.
Kelsier could have done it; he'd killed an Inquisitor. She wasn't
Kelsier, however. She had yet to decide if that was a bad or a good
thing.
Vin took a deep
breath, wishing she had a bit of atium to spare, and burned iron.
This let her Pull on a nearby coin—one of those that had been
shot at her—much as steel would have let her Push on it. She
caught it, dropped it, then jumped, making as if to Push on the coin
and shoot herself into the air.
One of the
Coinshots, however, Pushed against the coin, shooting it away. Since
Allomancy would only let a person Push directly away from—or
Pull directly toward—their body, Vin was left without a decent
anchor. Pushing against the coin would only shoot her sideways.
She dropped back to
the ground.
Let them think
they have me trapped, she thought, crouching in the center of the
street. The Thugs approached a little more confidently. Yes,
Vin thought. I know what you're thinking. This is the Mistborn who
killed the Lord Ruler? This scrawny thing? Can it be possible?
I wonder the
same thing myself.
The first Thug
ducked in to attack, and Vin burst into motion. Obsidian daggers
flashed in the night as she ripped them free from their sheaths, and
blood sprayed black in the darkness as she ducked beneath the Thug's
staff and slashed her weapons across his thighs.
The man cried out.
The night was no longer silent.
Men cursed as Vin
moved through them. The Thug's partner attacked her—blurringly
fast, his muscles fueled by pewter. His staff whipped a tassel from
Vin's mistcloak as she threw herself to the ground, then pushed
herself back up out of a third Thug's reach.
A spray of coins
flew toward her. Vin reached out and Pushed on them. The Coinshot,
however, continued to Push—and Vin's Push smashed against his.
Pushing and Pulling
metals was all about weight. And—with the coins between
them—that meant Vin's weight was slammed against the assassin's
weight. Both were tossed backward. Vin shot out of a Thug's reach;
the Coinshot fell to the ground.
A flurry of coins
came at her from the other direction. Still tumbling in the air, Vin
flared steel, giving herself an extra burst of power. Blue lines were
a jumbled mess, but she didn't need to isolate the coins to Push them
all away.
This Coinshot let
go of his missiles as soon as he felt Vin's touch. The bits of metal
scattered out into the mists.
Vin hit the
cobblestones shoulder-first. She rolled—flaring pewter to
enhance her balance—and flipped to her feet. At the same time,
she burned iron and Pulled hard on the disappearing coins.
They shot back
toward her. As soon as they got close, Vin jumped to the side and
Pushed them toward the approaching Thugs. The coins, however,
immediately veered away, twisting through the mists toward the
Lurcher. He was unable to Push the coins away—like all
Mistings, he only had one Allomantic power, and his was to Pull with
iron.
He did this
effectively, protecting the Thugs. He raised his shield and grunted
from the impact as the coins hit it and bounced away.
Vin was already
moving again. She ran directly for the now exposed Coinshot to her
left, the one who had fallen to the ground. The man yelped in
surprise, and the other Coinshot tried to distract Vin, but he was
too slow.
The Coinshot died
with a dagger in his chest. He was no Thug; he couldn't burn pewter
to enhance his body. Vin pulled out her dagger, then yanked his pouch
free. He gurgled quietly and collapsed back to the stones.
One, Vin
thought, spinning, sweat flying from her brow. She now faced seven
men down the corridor-like street. They probably expected her to
flee. Instead, she charged.
As she got close to
the Thugs, she jumped—then threw down the pouch she'd taken
from the dying man. The remaining Coinshot cried out, immediately
Pushing it away. Vin, however, got some lift from the coins, throwing
herself in a leap directly over the heads of the Thugs.
One of them—the
wounded one—had unfortunately been smart enough to remain
behind to protect the Coinshot. The Thug raised his cudgel as Vin
landed. She ducked his first attack, raised her dagger, and—
A blue line danced
into her vision. Quick. Vin reacted immediately, twisting and Pushing
against a door latch to throw herself out of the way. She hit the
ground on her side, then flung herself up with one hand. She landed
skidding on mist-wetted feet.
A coin hit the
ground behind her, bouncing against the cobbles. It hadn't come close
to hitting her. In fact, it had seemed aimed at the remaining
assassin Coinshot. He'd probably been forced to Push it away.
But who had fired
it?
OreSeur? Vin
wondered. But, that was foolish. The kandra was no Allomancer—and
besides, he wouldn't have taken the initiative. OreSeur did only what
he was expressly told.
The assassin
Coinshot looked equally confused. Vin glanced up, flaring tin, and
was rewarded with the sight of a man standing atop a nearby building.
A dark silhouette. He didn't even bother to hide.
It's him,
she thought. The Watcher.
The Watcher
remained atop his perch, offering no further interference as the
Thugs rushed Vin. She cursed as she found three staves coming at her
at once. She ducked one, spun around the other, then planted a dagger
in the chest of the man holding the third. He stumbled backward, but
didn't drop. Pewter kept him on his feet.
Why did the
Watcher interfere? Vin thought as she jumped away. Why would
he shoot that coin at a Coinshot who could obviously Push it away?
Her preoccupation
with the Watcher nearly cost her her life as an unnoticed Thug
charged her from the side. It was the man whose legs she'd slashed.
Vin reacted-just in time to dodge his blow. This, however, put her
into range of the other three.
All attacked at
once.
She actually
managed to twist out of the way of two of the strikes. One, however,
crashed into her side. The powerful blow tossed her across the
street, and she collided with a shop's wooden door. She heard a
crack—from the door, fortunately, and not her bones—and
she slumped to the ground, daggers lost. A normal person would be
dead. Her pewter-strengthened body, however, was tougher than that.
She gasped for
breath, forcing herself up to her feet, and flared tin. The metal
enhanced her senses—including her sense of pain—and the
sudden shock cleared her mind. Her side ached where she'd been
struck. But she couldn't stop. Not with a Thug charging her, swinging
his staff in an overhead blow.
Crouching before
the doorway, Vin flared pewter and caught the staff in both hands.
She growled, pulling back her left hand, then cracking her fist
against the weapon, shattering the fine hardwood in a single blow.
The Thug stumbled, and Vin smashed her half of the staff across his
eyes.
Though dazed, he
stayed on his feet. Can't fight the Thugs, she thought. I
have to keep moving.
She dashed to the
side, ignoring her pain. The Thugs tried to follow, but she was
lighter, thinner, and—much more important—faster. She
circled them, coming back toward the Coinshot, Smoker, and Lurcher. A
wounded Thug had again retreated to protect these men.
As Vin approached,
the Coinshot threw a double handful of coins at her. Vin Pushed the
coins away, then reached out and Pulled on the ones in the bag at the
man's waist.
The Coinshot
grunted as the bag whipped toward Vin. It was tied by a short tether
to his waist, and the pull of her weight jerked him forward. The Thug
grabbed and steadied him.
And since her
anchor couldn't move, Vin was instead Pulled toward it. She flared
her iron, flying through the air, raising a fist. The Coinshot cried
out and he pulled a tie to free the bag.
Too late. Vin's
momentum carried her forward, and she drove her fist into the
Coinshot's cheek as she passed. His head spun around, neck snapping.
As Vin landed, she brought her elbow up into the surprised Thug's
chin, tossing him backward. Her foot followed, crashing against the
Thug's neck.
Neither rose. That
was three down. The discarded coin pouch fell to the ground, breaking
and throwing a hundred sparkling bits of copper across the
cobblestones around Vin. She ignored the throbbing in her elbow and
faced down the Lurcher. He stood with his shield, looking strangely
unworried.
A crack
sounded behind her. Vin cried out, her tin-enhanced ears overreacting
to the sudden sound. Pain shot through her head, and she raised hands
to her ears. She'd forgotten the Smoker, who stood holding two
lengths of wood, crafted to make sharp noises when pounded together.
Movements and
reactions, actions and consequences—these were the essence of
Allomancy. Tin made her eyes pierce the mists—giving her an
edge over the assassins. However, the tin also made her ears
extremely acute. The Smoker raised his sticks again. Vin growled and
yanked a handful of coins off the cobblestones, then shot them at the
Smoker. The Lurcher, of course, Pulled them toward him instead. They
hit the shield and bounced free. And as they sprayed into the air,
Vin carefully Pushed one so it fell behind him.
The man lowered his
shield, unaware of the coin Vin had manipulated. Vin Pulled, whipping
the single coin directly toward her—and into the back of the
Lurcher's chest. He fell without a sound.
Four.
All fell still. The
Thugs running toward her drew to a stop, and the Smoker lowered his
sticks. They had no Coinshots and no Lurchers—nobody that could
Push or Pull metal—and Vin stood amid a field of coins. If she
used them, even the Thugs would fall quickly. All she had to do was—
Another coin shot
through the air, fired from the Watcher's rooftop. Vin cursed,
ducking. The coin, however, didn't strike her. It took the
stick-holding Smoker directly in the forehead. The man toppled
backward, dead.
What? Vin
thought, staring at the dead man.
The Thugs charged,
but Vin retreated, frowning. Why kill the Smoker? He wasn't a
threat anymore.
Unless . . .
Vin extinguished
her copper, then burned bronze, the metal that let her sense when
other Allomancers were using powers nearby. She couldn't feel the
Thugs burning pewter. They were still being Smoked, their Allomancy
hidden.
Someone else was
burning copper.
Suddenly, it all
made sense. It made sense that the group would risk attacking a full
Mistborn. It made sense that the Watcher had fired at the Coinshot.
It made sense that he had killed the Smoker.
Vin was in grave
danger.
She only had a
moment to make her decision. She did so on a hunch, but she'd grown
up on the streets, a thief and a scam artist. Hunches felt more
natural to her than logic ever would.
"OreSeur!"
she yelled. "Go for the palace!"
It was a code, of
course. Vin jumped back, momentarily ignoring the Thugs as her
servant ducked out of an alleyway. He pulled something off his belt
and whipped it toward Vin: a small glass vial, the kind that
Allomancers used to store metal shavings. Vin quickly Pulled the vial
to her hand. A short distance away, the second Coinshot—who had
lain there, as if dead—now cursed and scrambled to his feet.
Vin spun, drinking
the vial with a quick gulp. It contained only a single bead of metal.
Atium. She couldn't risk carrying it on her own body—couldn't
risk having it Pulled away from her during a fight. She'd ordered
OreSeur to remain close this night, ready to give her the vial in an
emergency.
The "Coinshot"
pulled a hidden glass dagger from his waist, charging at Vin ahead of
the Thugs, who were getting close. Vin paused for just a
moment—regretting her decision, but seeing its inevitability.
The men had hidden
a Mistborn among their numbers. A Mistborn like Vin, a person who
could burn all ten metals. A Mistborn who had been waiting for the
right moment to strike at her, to catch her unprepared.
He would have
atium, and there was only one way to fight someone who had atium. It
was the ultimate Allomantic metal, usable only by full Mistborn, and
it could easily decide the fate of a battle. Each bead was worth a
fortune—but what good was a fortune if she died?
Vin burned her
atium.
The world around
her seemed to change. Every moving object—swinging shutters,
blowing ash, attacking Thugs, even trails of mist—shot out a
translucent replica of itself. The replicas moved just in front of
their real counterparts, showing Vin exactly what would happen a few
moments in the future.
Only the Mistborn
was immune. Rather than shooting out a single atium shadow, he
released dozens—the sign that he was burning atium. He paused
just briefly. Vin's own body would have just exploded with dozens of
confusing atium shadows. Now that she could see the future, she could
see what he was going to do. That, in turn, changed what she was
going to do. That changed what he was going to do. And so, like the
reflections in two mirrors facing each other, the possibilities
continued into infinity. Neither had an advantage.
Though their
Mistborn paused, the four unfortunate Thugs continued to charge,
having no way to know that Vin burned atium. Vin turned, standing
beside the body of the fallen Smoker. With one foot, she kicked the
soundsticks into the air.
A Thug arrived,
swinging. His diaphanous atium shadow of a staff blow passed through
her body. Vin twisted, ducking to the side, and could feel the real
staff pass over her ear. The maneuver seemed easy within the aura of
atium.
She snatched one of
the soundsticks from the air, then slammed it up into the Thug's
neck. She spun, catching the other soundstick, then twisted back and
cracked it against the man's skull. He fell forward, groaning, and
Vin spun again, easily dodging between two more staves.
She smashed the
noise sticks against the sides of a second Thug's head. They
shattered—ringing with a hollow sound like that of a musician's
beat—as the Thug's skull cracked.
He fell, and did
not move again. Vin kicked his staff into the air, then dropped the
broken soundsticks and caught it. She spun, twisting the staff and
tripping both remaining Thugs at once. In a fluid motion, she
delivered two swift—yet powerful—blows to their faces.
She fell to a
crouch as the men died, holding the staff in one hand, her other hand
resting against the mist-wetted cobbles. The Mistborn held back, and
she could see uncertainty in his eyes. Power didn't necessarily mean
competence, and his two best advantages—surprise and atium—had
been negated.
He turned, Pulling
a group of coins up off the ground, then shot them. Not toward
Vin—but toward OreSeur, who still stood in the mouth of an
alleyway. The Mistborn obviously hoped that Vin's concern for her
servant would draw her attention away, perhaps letting him escape.
He was wrong.
Vin ignored the
coins, dashing forward. Even as OreSeur cried out in pain—a
dozen coins piercing his skin—Vin threw her staff at the
Mistborn's head. Once it left her fingers, however, its atium shadow
became firm and singular.
The Mistborn
assassin ducked, dodging perfectly. The move distracted him long
enough for her to close the distance, however. She needed to attack
quickly; the atium bead she'd swallowed had been small. It would burn
out quickly. And, once it was gone, she'd be exposed. Her opponent
would have total power over her. He—
Her terrified
opponent raised his dagger. At that moment, his atium ran out.
Vin's predatory
instincts reacted instantly, and she swung a fist. He raised an arm
to block her blow, but she saw it coming, and she changed the
direction of her attack. The blow took him square in the face. Then,
with deft fingers, she snatched his glass dagger before it could fall
and shatter. She stood and swung it through her opponent's neck.
He fell quietly.
Vin stood,
breathing heavily, the group of assassins dead around her. For just a
moment, she felt overwhelming power. With atium, she was invincible.
She could dodge any blow, kill any enemy.
Her atium ran out.
Suddenly,
everything seemed to grow dull. The pain in her side returned to her
mind, and she coughed, groaning. She'd have bruises—large ones.
Perhaps some cracked ribs.
But she'd won
again. Barely. What would happen when she failed? When she didn't
watch carefully enough, or fight skillfully enough?
Elend would die.
Vin sighed, and
looked up. He was still there, watching her from atop a roof.
Despite a half-dozen chases spread across several months, she'd never
managed to catch him. Someday she would corner him in the night.
But not today. She
didn't have the energy. In fact, a part of her worried that he'd
strike her down. But . . . she thought. He saved me. I
would have died if I'd gotten too close to that hidden Mistborn. An
instant of him burning atium with me unaware, and I'd have found his
daggers in my chest.
The Watcher stood
for a few more moments—wreathed, as always, in the curling
mists. Then he turned, jumping away into the night. Vin let him go;
she had to deal with OreSeur.
She stumbled over
to him, then paused. His nondescript body—in a servant's
trousers and shirt—had been pelted with coins, and blood seeped
from the several wounds.
He looked up at
her. "What?" he asked.
"I didn't
expect there to be blood."
OreSeur snorted.
"You probably didn't expect me to feel pain either."
Vin opened her
mouth, then paused. Actually, she hadn't ever thought about it. Then
she hardened herself. What right does this thing have to
chastise me?
Still, OreSeur had
proven useful. "Thank you for throwing me the vial," she
said.
"It was my
duty, Mistress," OreSeur said, grunting as he pulled his broken
body up against the side of the alleyway. "I was charged with
your protection by Master Kelsier. As always, I serve the Contract."
Ah, yes. The
almighty Contract. "Can you walk?"
"Only with
effort, Mistress. The coins shattered several of these bones. I will
need a new body. One of the assassins, perhaps?"
Vin frowned. She
glanced back toward the dead men, and her stomach twisted slightly at
the gruesome sight of their fallen bodies. She'd killed them, eight
men, with the cruel efficiency that Kelsier had trained in her.
This is what I
am, she thought. A killer, like those men. That was how it
had to be. Someone had to protect Elend.
However, the
thought of OreSeur eating one of them—digesting the corpse,
letting his strange kandra senses memorize the positioning of
muscles, skin, and organs, so that he could reproduce them—sickened
her.
She glanced to the
side, and saw the veiled scorn in OreSeur's eyes. They both knew what
she thought of him eating human bodies. They both knew what he
thought of her prejudice.
"No," Vin
said. "We won't use one of these men."
"You'll have
to find me another body, then," OreSeur said. "The Contract
states that I cannot be forced to kill men."
Vin's stomach
twisted again. I'll think of something, she thought. His
current body was that of a murderer, taken after an execution. Vin
was still worried that someone in the city would recognize the face.
"Can you get
back to the palace?" Vin asked.
"With time,"
OreSeur said.
Vin nodded,
dismissing him, then turned back toward the bodies. Somehow she
suspected that this night would mark a distinct turning point in the
fate of the Central Dominance.
Straff's assassins
had done more damage than they would ever know. That bead of atium
had been her last. The next time a Mistborn attacked her, she would
be exposed.
And would likely
die as easily as the Mistborn she'd slain this night.
My brethren
ignore the other facts. They cannot connect the other strange things
that are happening. They are deaf to my objections and blind to my
discoveries.





3
ELEND DROPPED HIS
PEN TO his desk with a sigh, then leaned back in his chair and rubbed
his forehead.
Elend figured that
he knew as much about political theory as any living man. He'd
certainly read more about economics, studied more about governments,
and held more political debates than anyone he knew. He understood
all the theories about how to make a nation stable and fair, and had
tried to implement those in his new kingdom.
He just hadn't
realized how incredibly frustrating a parliamentary council would be.
He stood up and
walked over to get himself some chilled wine. He paused, however, as
he glanced out his balcony doors. In the distance, a glowing haze
shone through the mists. The campfires of his father's army.
He put down the
wine. He was already exhausted, and the alcohol probably wouldn't
help. I can't afford to fall asleep until I get this done! he
thought, forcing himself to return to his seat. The Assembly would
meet soon, and he needed to have the proposal finished tonight.
Elend picked up the
sheet, scanning its contents. His handwriting looked cramped even to
him, and the page was scattered with crossed-out lines and
notations—reflections of his frustration. They'd known about
the army's approach for weeks now, and the Assembly still quibbled
about what to do.
Some of its members
wanted to offer a peace treaty; others thought they should simply
surrender the city. Still others felt they should attack without
delay. Elend feared that the surrender faction was gaining strength;
hence his proposal. The motion, if passed, would buy him more time.
As king, he already had prime right of parlay with a foreign
dictator. The proposal would forbid the Assembly from doing anything
rash until he'd at least met with his father.
Elend sighed again,
dropping the sheet. The Assembly was only twenty-four men, but
getting them to agree on anything was almost more challenging than
any of the problems they argued about. Elend turned, looking past the
solitary lamp on his desk, out through the open balcony doors and
toward the fires. Overhead, he heard feet scuttling on the
rooftop—Vin, going about her nightly rounds.
Elend smiled
fondly, but not even thinking of Vin could restore his good temper.
That group of assassins she fought tonight. Can I use that
somehow? Perhaps if he made the attack public, the Assembly would
be reminded of the disdain Straff had for human life, and then be
less likely to surrender the city to him. But . . . perhaps they'd
also get frightened that he'd send assassins after them, and
be more likely to surrender.
Sometimes Elend
wondered if the Lord Ruler had been right. Not in oppressing the
people, of course—but in retaining all of the power for
himself. The Final Empire had been nothing if not stable. It had
lasted a thousand years, weathering rebellions, maintaining a strong
hold on the world.
The Lord Ruler
was immortal, though, Elend thought. That's an advantage I'll
certainly never have.
The Assembly was a
better way. By giving the people a parliament with real legal
authority, Elend would craft a stable government. The people would
have a king—a man to provide continuity, a symbol of unity. A
man who wouldn't be tainted by the need to get reappointed. However,
they would also have an Assembly—a council made up of their
peers that could voice their concerns.
It all sounded
wonderful in theory. Assuming they survived the next few months.
Elend rubbed his
eyes, then dipped his pen and began to scratch new sentences at the
bottom of the document.
The Lord Ruler was
dead.
Even a year later,
Vin sometimes found that concept difficult to grasp. The Lord Ruler
had been . . . everything. King and god, lawmaker and ultimate
authority. He had been eternal and absolute, and now he was dead.
Vin had killed him.
Of course, the
truth wasn't as impressive as the stories. It hadn't been heroic
strength or mystical power that had let Vin defeat the emperor. She'd
just figured out the trick that he'd been using to make himself
immortal, and she'd fortunately—almost accidentally—exploited
his weakness. She wasn't brave or clever. Just lucky.
Vin sighed. Her
bruises still throbbed, but she had suffered far worse. She sat atop
the palace—once Keep Venture—just above Elend's balcony.
Her reputation might have been unearned, but it had helped keep Elend
alive. Though dozens of warlords squabbled in the land that had once
been the Final Empire, none of them had marched on Luthadel.
Until now.
Fires burned
outside the city. Straff would soon know that his assassins had
failed. What then? Assault the city? Ham and Clubs warned that
Luthadel couldn't hold against a determined attack. Straff had to
know that.
Still, for the
moment, Elend was safe. Vin had gotten pretty good at finding and
killing assassins; barely a month passed that she didn't catch
someone trying to sneak into the palace. Many were just spies, and
very few were Allomancers. However, a normal man's steel knife would
kill Elend just as easily as an Allomancer's glass one.
She wouldn't let
that occur. Whatever else happened—whatever sacrifices it
required—Elend had to stay alive.
Suddenly
apprehensive, she slipped over to the skylight to check on him. Elend
sat safely at his desk below, scribbling away on some new proposal or
edict. Kingship had changed the man remarkably little. About four
years her senior—placing him in his early twenties—Elend
was a man who put great stock in learning, but little in appearance.
He only bothered to comb his hair when he attended an important
function, and he somehow managed to wear even well-tailored outfits
with an air of dishevelment.
He was probably the
best man she had ever known. Earnest, determined, clever, and caring.
And, for some reason, he loved her. At times, that fact was even more
amazing to her than her part in the Lord Ruler's death.
Vin looked up,
glancing back at the army lights. Then she looked to the sides. The
Watcher had not returned. Often on nights like this he would tempt
her, coming dangerously close to Elend's room before disappearing
into the city.
Of course, if
he'd wanted to kill Elend, he could just have done it while I was
fighting the others . . . .
It was a
disquieting thought. Vin couldn't watch Elend every moment. He was
exposed a frightening amount of the time.
True, Elend had
other bodyguards, and some were even Allomancers. They, however, were
stretched as thin as she was. This night's assassins had been the
most skilled, and most dangerous, that she had ever faced. She
shivered, thinking about the Mistborn who had hid among them. He
hadn't been very good, but he wouldn't have needed much skill to burn
atium, then strike Vin directly in the right place.
The shifting mists
continued to spin. The army's presence whispered a disturbing truth:
The surrounding warlords were beginning to consolidate their domains,
and were thinking about expansion. Even if Luthadel stood against
Straff somehow, others would come.
Quietly, Vin closed
her eyes and burned bronze, still worried that the Watcher—or
some other Allomancer—might be nearby, planning to attack Elend
in the supposedly safe aftermath of the assassination attempt. Most
Mistborn considered bronze to be a relatively useless metal, as it
was easily negated. With copper, a Mistborn could mask their
Allomancy—not to mention protect themselves from emotional
manipulation by zinc or brass. Most Mistborn considered it foolish
not to have their copper on at all times.
And yet . . . Vin
had the ability to pierce copperclouds.
A coppercloud
wasn't a visible thing. It was far more vague. A pocket of deadened
air where Allomancers could burn their metals and not worry that
bronze burners would be able to sense them. But Vin could sense
Allomancers who used metals inside of a coppercloud. She still wasn't
certain why. Even Kelsier, the most powerful Allomancer she had
known, hadn't been able to pierce a coppercloud.
Tonight, however,
she sensed nothing.
With a sigh, she
opened her eyes. Her strange power was confusing, but it wasn't
unique to her. Marsh had confirmed that Steel Inquisitors could
pierce copperclouds, and she was certain that the Lord Ruler had been
able to do so. But . . . why her? Why could Vin—a girl who
barely had two years' training as a Mistborn—do it?
There was more. She
still remembered vividly the morning when she'd fought the Lord
Ruler. There was something about that event that she hadn't told
anyone—partially because it made her fear, just a bit, that the
rumors and legends about her were true. Somehow, she'd drawn upon the
mists, using them to fuel her Allomancy instead of metals.
It was only with
that power, the power of the mists, that she had been able to beat
the Lord Ruler in the end. She liked to tell herself that she had
simply been lucky in figuring out the Lord Ruler's tricks. But . . .
there had been something strange that night, something that
she'd done. Something that she shouldn't have been able to do, and
had never been able to repeat.
Vin shook her head.
There was so much they didn't know, and not just about Allomancy. She
and the other leaders of Elend's fledgling kingdom tried their best,
but without Kelsier to guide them, Vin felt blind. Plans, successes,
and even goals were like shadowy figures in the mist, formless and
indistinct.
You shouldn't
have left us, Kell, she thought. You saved the world—but
you should have been able to do it without dying. Kelsier, the
Survivor of Hathsin, the man who had conceived and implemented the
collapse of the Final Empire. Vin had known him, worked with him,
been trained by him. He was a legend and a hero. Yet, he had also
been a man. Fallible. Imperfect. It was easy for the skaa to revere
him, then blame Elend and the others for the dire situation that
Kelsier had created.
The thought left
her feeling bitter. Thinking about Kelsier often did that. Perhaps it
was the sense of abandonment, or perhaps it was just the
uncomfortable knowledge that Kelsier—like Vin herself—didn't
fully live up to his reputation.
Vin sighed, closing
her eyes, still burning bronze. The evening's fight had taken a lot
out of her, and she was beginning to dread the hours she still
intended to spend watching. It would be difficult to remain alert
when—
She sensed
something.
Vin snapped her
eyes open, flaring her tin. She spun and stooped against the rooftop
to obscure her profile. There was someone out there, burning metal.
Bronze pulses thumped weakly, faint, almost unnoticeable—like
someone playing drums very quietly. They were muffled by a
coppercloud. The person—whoever it was—thought that their
copper would hide them.
So far, Vin hadn't
left anyone alive, save Elend and Marsh, who knew of her strange
power.
Vin crept forward,
fingers and toes chilled by the roof's copper sheeting. She tried to
determine the direction of the pulses. Something was . . . odd about
them. She had trouble distinguishing the metals her enemy was
burning. Was that the quick, beating thump of pewter? Or was it the
rhythm of iron? The pulses seemed indistinct, like ripples in a thick
mud.
They were coming
from somewhere very close. . . . On the rooftop . . .
Just in front of
her.
Vin froze,
crouching, the night breezes blowing a wall of mist across her. Where
was he? Her senses argued with each other; her bronze said there was
something right in front of her, but her eyes refused to agree.
She studied the
dark mists, glanced upward just to be certain, then stood. This is
the first time my bronze has been wrong, she thought with a
frown.
Then she saw it.
Not something in
the mists, but something of the mists. The figure stood a few
feet away, easy to miss, for its shape was only faintly outlined by
the mist. Vin gasped, stepping backward.
The figure
continued to stand where it was. She couldn't tell much about it; its
features were cloudy and vague, outlined by the chaotic churnings of
windblown mist. If not for the form's persistence, she could have
dismissed it—like the shape of an animal seen briefly in the
clouds.
But it stayed. Each
new curl of the mist added definition to thin its body and long head.
Haphazard, yet persistent. It suggested a human, but it lacked the
Watcher's solidity. It felt . . . looked . . . wrong.
The figure took a
step forward.
Vin reacted
instantly, throwing up a handful of coins and Pushing them through
the air. The bits of metal zipped through the mist, trailing streaks,
and passed right through the shadowy figure.
It stood for a
moment. Then, it simply puffed away, dissipating into the mists'
random curls.
Elend wrote the
final line with a flair, though he knew he'd simply have a scribe
rewrite the proposal. Still, he was proud. He thought that he'd been
able to work out an argument that would finally convince the Assembly
that they could not simply surrender to Straff.
He glanced
unconsciously toward a stack of papers on his desk. On their top sat
an innocent-seeming yellow letter, still folded, bloodlike smudge of
wax broken at the seal. The letter had been short. Elend remembered
its words easily.
Son,
I
trust you've enjoyed seeing after Venture interests in Luthadel. I
have secured the Northern Dominance, and will shortly be returning to
our keep in Luthadel. You may turn over control of the city to me at
that time.

King Straff Venture
Of all the warlords
and despots that had afflicted the Final Empire since the Lord
Ruler's death, Straff was the most dangerous. Elend knew this
firsthand. His father was a true imperial nobleman: He saw life as a
competition between lords to see who could earn the greatest
reputation. He had played the game well, making House Venture the
most powerful of the pre-Collapse noble families.
Elend's father
would not see the Lord Ruler's death as a tragedy or a victory—just
as an opportunity. The fact that Straff's supposedly weak-willed fool
of a son now claimed to be king of the Central Dominance probably
gave him no end of mirth.
Elend shook his
head, turning back to the proposal. A few more rereads, a few
tweaks, and I'll finally be able to get some sleep. I just—
A cloaked form
dropped from the skylight in the roof and landed with a quiet thump
behind him.
Elend raised an
eyebrow, turning toward the crouching figure. "You know, I leave
the balcony open for a reason, Vin. You could come in that way, if
you wanted."
"I know,"
Vin said. Then she darted across the room, moving with an
Allomancer's unnatural litheness. She checked beneath his bed, then
moved over to his closet and threw open the doors. She jumped back
with the tension of an alert animal, but apparently found nothing
inside that met with her disapproval, for she moved over to peek
through the door leading into the rest of Elend's chambers.
Elend watched her
with fondness. It had taken him some time to get used to Vin's
particular . . . idiosyncrasies. He teased her about being paranoid;
she just claimed she was careful. Regardless, half the time she
visited his chambers she checked underneath his bed and in his
closet. The other times, she held herself back—but Elend often
caught her glancing distrustfully toward potential hiding places.
She was far less
jumpy when she didn't have a particular reason to worry about him.
However, Elend was only just beginning to understand that there was a
very complex person hiding behind the face he had once known as
Valette Renoux's. He had fallen in love with her courtly side without
ever knowing the nervous, furtive Mistborn side. It was still a
little difficult to see them as the same person.
Vin closed the
door, then paused briefly, watching him with her round, dark eyes.
Elend found himself smiling. Despite her oddities—or, more
likely because of them—he loved this thin woman with the
determined eyes and blunt temperament. She was like no one he had
ever known—a woman of simple, yet honest, beauty and wit.
She did, however,
sometimes worry him.
"Vin?" he
asked, standing.
"Have you seen
anything strange tonight?"
Elend paused.
"Besides you?"
She frowned,
striding across the room. Elend watched her small form, clothed in
black trousers and a man's buttoning shirt, mistcloak tassels
trailing behind her. She wore the cloak's hood down, as usual, and
she stepped with a supple grace—the unconscious elegance of a
person burning pewter.
Focus! he
told himself. You really are getting tired. "Vin?
What's wrong?"
Vin glanced toward
the balcony. "That Mistborn, the Watcher, is in the city again."
"You're sure?"
Vin nodded. "But
. . . I don't think he's going to come for you tonight."
Elend frowned. The
balcony doors were still open, and trails of mist puffed through
them, creeping along the floor until they finally evaporated. Beyond
those doors was . . . darkness. Chaos.
It's just mist,
he told himself. Water vapor. Nothing to fear. "What
makes you think the Mistborn won't come for me?"
Vin shrugged. "I
just feel he won't."
She often answered
that way. Vin had grown up a creature of the streets, and she trusted
her instincts. Oddly, so did Elend. He eyed her, reading the
uncertainty in her posture. Something else had unsettled her this
night. He looked into her eyes, holding them for a moment, until she
glanced away.
"What?"
he asked.
"I saw . . .
something else," she said. "Or, I thought I did. Something
in the mist, like a person formed from smoke. I could feel it, too,
with Allomancy. It disappeared, though."
Elend frowned more
deeply. He walked forward, putting his arms around her. "Vin,
you're pushing yourself too hard. You can't keep prowling the city at
night and then staying up all day. Even Allomancers need rest."
She nodded quietly.
In his arms, she didn't seem to him like the powerful warrior who had
slain the Lord Ruler. She felt like a woman past the edge of fatigue,
a woman overwhelmed by events—a woman who probably felt a lot
like Elend did.
She let him hold
her. At first, there was a slight stiffness to her posture. It was as
if a piece of her still expected to be hurt—a primal sliver
that couldn't understand that it was possible to be touched out of
love rather than anger. Then, however, she relaxed. Elend was one of
the few she could do that around. When she held him—really held
him—she clung with a desperation that bordered on terror.
Somehow, despite her powerful skill as an Allomancer and her stubborn
determination, Vin was frighteningly vulnerable. She seemed to need
Elend. For that, he felt lucky.
Frustrated, at
times. But lucky. Vin and he hadn't discussed his marriage proposal
and her refusal, though Elend often thought of the encounter.
Women are
difficult enough to understand, he thought, and I had to go
and pick the oddest one of the lot. Still, he couldn't really
complain. She loved him. He could deal with her idiosyncrasies.
Vin sighed, then
looked up at him, finally relaxing as he leaned down to kiss her. He
held it for a long moment, and she sighed. After the kiss, she rested
her head on his shoulder. "We do have another problem," she
said quietly. "I used the last of the atium tonight."
"Fighting the
assassins?"
Vin nodded.
"Well, we knew
it would happen eventually. Our stockpile couldn't last forever."
"Stockpile?"
Vin asked. "Kelsier only left us six beads."
Elend sighed, then
pulled her tight. His new government was supposed to have inherited
the Lord Ruler's atium reserves—a supposed cache of the metal
comprising an amazing treasure. Kelsier had counted on his new
kingdom holding those riches; he had died expecting it. There was
only one problem. Nobody had ever found the reserve. They had found
some small bit—the atium that had made up the bracers that the
Lord Ruler had used as a Feruchemical battery to store up age.
However, they had spent those on supplies for the city, and they had
actually contained only a very small bit of atium. Nothing like the
cache was said to have. There should still be, somewhere in the city,
a wealth of atium thousands of times larger than those bracers.
"We'll just
have to deal with it," Elend said.
"If a Mistborn
attacks you, I won't be able to kill him."
"Only if he
has atium," Elend said. "It's becoming more and more rare.
I doubt the other kings have much of it."
Kelsier had
destroyed the Pits of Hathsin, the only place where atium could be
mined. Still, if Vin did have to fight someone with atium . .
.
Don't think
about that, he told himself. Just keep searching. Perhaps we
can buy some. Or maybe we'll find the Lord Ruler's cache. If it even
exists . . . .
Vin looked up at
him, reading the concern in his eyes, and he knew she had arrived at
the same conclusions as he. There was little that could be
accomplished at the moment; Vin had done well to conserve their atium
as long as she had. Still, as Vin stepped back and let Elend return
to his table, he couldn't help thinking about how they could have
spent that atium. His people would need food for the winter.
But, by selling
the metal, he thought, sitting, we would have put more of the
world's most dangerous Allomantic weapon into the hands of our
enemies. Better that Vin used it up.
As he began to work
again, Vin poked her head over his shoulder, obscuring his lamplight.
"What is it?" she asked.
"The proposal
blocking the Assembly until I've had my right of parlay."
"Again?"
she asked, cocking her head and squinting as she tried to make out
his handwriting.
"The Assembly
rejected the last version."
Vin frowned. "Why
don't you just tell them that they have to accept it? You're
the king."
"Now, see,"
Elend said, "that's what I'm trying to prove by all this. I'm
just one man, Vin—maybe my opinion isn't better than theirs. If
we all work on the proposal together, it will come out better than if
one man had done it himself."
Vin shook her head.
"It will be too weak. No teeth. You should trust yourself more."
"It's not
about trust. It's about what's right. We spent a thousand years
fighting off the Lord Ruler—if I do things the same way he did,
then what will be the difference?"
Vin turned and
looked him in the eyes. "The Lord Ruler was an evil man. You're
a good one. That's the difference."
Elend smiled. "It's
that easy for you, isn't it?"
Vin nodded.
Elend leaned up and
kissed her again. "Well, some of us have to make things a little
more complicated, so you'll have to humor us. Now, kindly remove
yourself from my light so I can get back to work."
She snorted, but
stood up and rounded the desk, leaving behind a faint scent of
perfume. Elend frowned. When'd she put that on? Many of her
motions were so quick that he missed them.
Perfume—just
another of the apparent contradictions that made up the woman who
called herself Vin. She wouldn't have been wearing it out in the
mists; she usually put it on just for him. Vin liked to be
unobtrusive, but she loved wearing scents—and got annoyed at
him if he didn't notice when she was trying out a new one. She seemed
suspicious and paranoid, yet she trusted her friends with a dogmatic
loyalty. She went out at night in black and gray, trying so hard to
hide—but Elend had seen her at the balls a year ago, and she
had looked natural in gowns and dresses.
For some reason she
had stopped wearing those. She hadn't ever explained why.
Elend shook his
head, turning back to his proposal. Next to Vin, politics seemed
simplistic. She rested her arms on the desktop, watching him work,
yawning.
"You should
get some rest," he said, dipping his pen again.
Vin paused, then
nodded. She removed her mistcloak, wrapped it around herself, then
curled up on the rug beside his desk.
Elend paused. "I
didn't mean here, Vin," he said with amusement.
"There's still
a Mistborn out there somewhere," she said with a tired, muffled
voice. "I'm not leaving you." She twisted in the cloak, and
Elend caught a brief grimace of pain on her face. She was favoring
her left side.
She didn't often
tell him the details of her fights. She didn't want to worry him. It
didn't help.
Elend pushed down
his concern and forced himself to start reading again. He was almost
finished—just a bit more and—
A knock came at his
door.
Elend turned with
frustration, wondering at this new interruption. Ham poked his head
in the doorway a second later.
"Ham?"
Elend said. "You're still awake?"
"Unfortunately,"
Ham said, stepping into the room.
"Mardra is
going to kill you for working late again," Elend said, setting
down his pen. Complain though he might about some of Vin's quirks, at
least she shared Elend's nocturnal habits.
Ham just rolled his
eyes at the comment. He still wore his standard vest and trousers.
He'd agreed to be the captain of Elend's guard on a single condition:
that he would never have to wear a uniform. Vin cracked an eye as Ham
wandered into the room, then relaxed again.
"Regardless,"
Elend said. "To what do I owe the visit?"
"I thought you
might want to know that we identified those assassins who tried to
kill Vin."
Elend nodded.
"Probably men I know." Most Allomancers were noblemen, and
he was familiar with all of those in Straff's retinue.
"Actually, I
doubt it," Ham said. "They were Westerners."
Elend paused,
frowning, and Vin perked up. "You're sure?"
Ham nodded. "Makes
it a bit unlikely that your father sent them—unless he's done
some heavy recruiting in Fadrex City. They were of Houses Gardre and
Conrad, mostly."
Elend sat back. His
father was based in Urteau, hereditary home of the Venture family.
Fadrex was halfway across the empire from Urteau, several months'
worth of travel. The chances were slim that his father would have
access to a group of Western Allomancers.
"Have you
heard of Ashweather Cett?" Ham asked.
Elend nodded. "One
of the men who's set himself up as king in the Western Dominance. I
don't know much about him."
Vin frowned,
sitting. "You think he sent these?"
Ham nodded. "They
must have been waiting for a chance to slip into the city, and the
traffic at the gates these last few days would have provided the
opportunity. That makes the arrival of Straff's army and the attack
on Vin's life something of a coincidence."
Elend glanced at
Vin. She met his eyes, and he could tell that she wasn't completely
convinced that Straff hadn't sent the assassins. Elend, however,
wasn't so skeptical. Pretty much every tyrant in the area had tried
to take him out at one point or another. Why not Cett?
It's that atium,
Elend thought with frustration. He'd never found the Lord Ruler's
cache—but that didn't stop the despots in the empire from
assuming he was hiding it somewhere.
"Well, at
least your father didn't send the assassins," Ham said, ever the
optimist.
Elend shook his
head. "Our relationship wouldn't stop him, Ham. Trust me."
"He's your
father," Ham said, looking troubled.
"Things like
that don't matter to Straff. He probably hasn't sent assassins
because he doesn't think I'm worth the trouble. If we last long
enough, though, he will."
Ham shook his head.
"I've heard of sons killing their fathers to take their place .
. . but fathers killing their sons . . . I wonder what that says
about old Straff's mind, that he'd be willing to kill you. You think
that—"
"Ham?"
Elend interrupted.
"Hum?"
"You know I'm
usually good for a discussion, but I don't really have time for
philosophy right now."
"Oh, right."
Ham smiled wanly, standing and moving to go. "I should get back
to Mardra anyway."
Elend nodded,
rubbing his forehead and picking up his pen yet again. "Make
sure you gather the crew for a meeting. We need to organize our
allies, Ham. If we don't come up with something incredibly clever,
this kingdom may be doomed."
Ham turned back,
still smiling. "You make it sound so desperate, El."
Elend looked over
at him. "The Assembly is a mess, a half-dozen warlords with
superior armies are breathing down my neck, barely a month passes
without someone sending assassins to kill me, and the woman I love is
slowly driving me insane."
Vin snorted at this
last part.
"Oh, is that
all?" Ham said. "See? It's not so bad after all. I mean, we
could be facing an immortal god and his all-powerful priests
instead."
Elend paused, then
chuckled despite himself. "Good night, Ham," he said,
turning back to his proposal.
"Good night,
Your Majesty."
Perhaps they are
right. Perhaps I am mad, or jealous, or simply daft. My name is
Kwaan. Philosopher, scholar, traitor. I am the one who discovered
Alendi, and I am the one who first proclaimed him to be the Hero of
Ages. I am the one who started this all.





4
THE BODY SHOWED NO
OVERT wounds. It still lay where it had fallen—the other
villagers had been afraid to move it. Its arms and legs were twisted
in awkward positions, the dirt around it scuffed from predeath
thrashings.
Sazed reached out,
running his fingers along one of the marks. Though the soil here in
the Eastern Dominance held far more clay than soil did in the north,
it was still more black than it was brown. Ashfalls came even this
far south. Ashless soil, washed clean and fertilized, was a luxury
used only for the ornamental plants of noble gardens. The rest of the
world had to do what it could with untreated soil.
"You say that
he was alone when he died?" Sazed asked, turning to the small
cluster of villagers standing behind him.
A leather-skinned
man nodded. "Like I said, Master Terrisman. He was just standing
there, no one else about. He paused, then he fell and wiggled on the
ground for a bit. After that, he just . . . stopped moving."
Sazed turned back
to the corpse, studying the twisted muscles, the face locked in a
mask of pain. Sazed had brought his medical coppermind—the
metal armband wrapped around his upper right arm—and he reached
into it with his mind, pulling out some of the memorized books he had
stored therein. Yes, there were some diseases that killed with shakes
and spasms. They rarely took a man so suddenly, but it sometimes
happened. If it hadn't been for other circumstances, Sazed would have
paid the death little heed.
"Please,
repeat to me again what you saw," Sazed asked.
The leather-skinned
man at the front of the group, Teur, paled slightly. He was in an odd
position—his natural desire for notoriety would make him want
to gossip about his experience. However, doing so could earn the
distrust of his superstitious fellows.
"I was just
passing by, Master Terrisman," Teur said. "On the path
twenty yards yon. I seen old Jed working his field—a hard
worker, he was. Some of us took a break when the lords left, but old
Jed just kept on. Guess he knew we'd be needing food for the winter,
lords or no lords."
Teur paused, then
glanced to the side. "I know what people say, Master Terrisman,
but I seen what I seen. It was day when I passed, but there was mist
in the valley here. It stopped me, because I've never been out in the
mist—my wife'll vouch me that. I was going to turn back, and
then I seen old Jed. He was just working away, as if he hadn't seen
the mist.
"I was going
to call out to him, but before I could, he just . . . well, like I
told you. I seen him standing there, then he froze. The mist swirled
about him a bit, then he began to jerk and twist, like something
really strong was holding him and shaking him. He fell. Didn't get up
after that."
Still kneeling,
Sazed looked back at the corpse. Teur apparently had a reputation for
tall tales. Yet, the body was a chilling corroboration—not to
mention Sazed's own experience several weeks before.
Mist during the
day.
Sazed stood,
turning toward the villagers. "Please fetch for me a shovel."
Nobody helped him
dig the grave. It was slow, muggy work in the southern heat, which
was strong despite the advent of autumn. The clay earth was difficult
to move—but, fortunately, Sazed had a bit of extra stored-up
strength inside a pewtermind, and he tapped it for help.
He needed it, for
he wasn't what one would call an athletic man. Tall and long-limbed,
he had the build of a scholar, and still wore the colorful robes of a
Terris steward. He also still kept his head shaved, after the manner
of the station he had served in for the first forty-some years of his
life. He didn't wear much of his jewelry now—he didn't want to
tempt highway bandits—but his earlobes were stretched out and
pierced with numerous holes for earrings.
Tapping strength
from his pewtermind enlarged his muscles slightly, giving him the
build of a stronger man. Even with the extra strength, however, his
steward's robes were stained with sweat and dirt by the time he
finished digging. He rolled the body into the grave, and stood
quietly for a moment. The man had been a dedicated farmer.
Sazed searched
through his religions coppermind for an appropriate theology. He
started with an index—one of the many that he had created. When
he had located an appropriate religion, he pulled free detailed
memories about its practices. The writings entered his mind as fresh
as when he had just finished memorizing them. They would fade, with
time, like all memories—however, he intended to place them back
in the coppermind long before that happened. It was the way of the
Keeper, the method by which his people retained enormous wealths of
information.
This day, the
memories he selected were of HaDah, a southern religion with an
agricultural deity. Like most religions—which had been
oppressed during the time of the Lord Ruler—the HaDah faith was
a thousand years extinct.
Following the
dictates of the HaDah funeral ceremony, Sazed walked over to a nearby
tree—or, at least, one of the shrublike plants that passed for
trees in this area. He broke off a long branch—the peasants
watching him curiously—and carried it back to the grave. He
stooped down and drove it into the dirt at the bottom of the hole,
just beside the corpse's head. Then he stood and began to shovel dirt
back into the grave.
The peasants
watched him with dull eyes. So depressed, Sazed thought. The
Eastern Dominance was the most chaotic and unsettled of the five
Inner Dominances. The only men in this crowd were well past their
prime. The press gangs had done their work efficiently; the husbands
and fathers of this village were likely dead on some battlefield that
no longer mattered.
It was hard to
believe that anything could actually be worse than the Lord Ruler's
oppression. Sazed told himself that these people's pain would pass,
that they would someday know prosperity because of what he and the
others had done. Yet, he had seen farmers forced to slaughter each
other, had seen children starve because some despot had
"requisitioned" a village's entire food supply. He had seen
thieves kill freely because the Lord Ruler's troops no longer
patrolled the canals. He had seen chaos, death, hatred, and disorder.
And he couldn't help but acknowledge that he was partially to blame.
He continued to
refill the hole. He had been trained as a scholar and a domestic
attendant; he was a Terrisman steward, the most useful, most
expensive, and most prestigious of servants in the Final Empire. That
meant almost nothing now. He'd never dug a grave, but he did his
best, trying to be reverent as he piled dirt on the corpse.
Surprisingly, about halfway through the process, the peasants began
to help him, pushing dirt from the pile into the hole.
Perhaps there is
hope for these yet, Sazed thought, thankfully letting one of the
others take his shovel and finish the work. When they were done, the
very tip of the HaDah branch breached the dirt at the head of the
grave.
"Why'd you do
that?" Teur asked, nodding to the branch.
Sazed smiled. "It
is a religious ceremony, Goodman Teur. If you please, there is a
prayer that should accompany it."
"A prayer?
Something from the Steel Ministry?"
Sazed shook his
head. "No, my friend. It is a prayer from a previous time, a
time before the Lord Ruler."
The peasants eyed
each other, frowning. Teur just rubbed his wrinkled chin. They all
remained quiet, however, as Sazed said a short HaDah prayer. When he
finished, he turned toward the peasants. "It was known as the
religion of HaDah. Some of your ancestors might have followed it, I
think. If any of you wish, I can teach you of its precepts."
The assembled crowd
stood quietly. There weren't many of them—two dozen or so,
mostly middle-aged women and a few older men. There was a single
young man with a club leg; Sazed was surprised that he'd lived so
long on a plantation. Most lords killed invalids to keep them from
draining resources.
"When is the
Lord Ruler coming back?" asked a woman.
"I do not
believe that he will," Sazed said.
"Why did he
abandon us?"
"It is a time
of change," Sazed said. "Perhaps it is also time to learn
of other truths, other ways."
The group of people
shuffled quietly. Sazed sighed quietly; these people associated faith
with the Steel Ministry and its obligators. Religion wasn't something
that skaa worried about—save, perhaps, to avoid it when
possible.
The Keepers
spent a thousand years gathering and memorizing the dying religions
of the world, Sazed thought. Who would have thought that
now—with the Lord Ruler gone—people wouldn't care enough
to want what they'd lost?
Yet, he found it
hard to think ill of these people. They were struggling to survive,
their already harsh world suddenly made unpredictable. They were
tired. Was it any wonder that talk of beliefs long forgotten failed
to interest them?
"Come,"
Sazed said, turning toward the village. "There are other
things—more practical things—that I can teach you."
And I am the one
who betrayed Alendi, for I now know that he must never be allowed to
complete his quest.





5
VIN COULD SEE SIGNS
OF anxiety reflected in the city. Workers milled anxiously and
markets bustled with an edge of concern—showing that same
apprehension that one might see in a cornered rodent. Frightened, but
not sure what to do. Doomed with nowhere to run.
Many had left the
city during the last year—noblemen fleeing, merchants seeking
some other place of business. Yet, at the same time, the city had
swelled with an influx of skaa. They had somehow heard of Elend's
proclamation of freedom, and had come with optimism—or, at
least, as much optimism as an overworked, underfed, repeatedly beaten
populace could manage.
And so, despite
predictions that Luthadel would soon fall, despite whispers that its
army was small and weak, the people had stayed. Worked. Lived. Just
as they always had. The life of a skaa had never been very certain.
It was still
strange for Vin to see the market so busy. She walked down Kenton
Street, wearing her customary trousers and buttoned shirt, thinking
about the time when she'd visited the street during the days before
the Collapse. It had been the quiet home of some exclusive tailoring
shops.
When Elend had
abolished the restrictions on skaa merchants, Kenton Street had
changed. The thoroughfare had blossomed into a wild bazaar of shops,
pushcarts, and tents. In order to target the newly empowered—and
newly waged—skaa workers, the shop owners had altered their
selling methods. Where once they had coaxed with rich window
displays, they now called and demanded, using criers, salesmen, and
even jugglers to try to attract trade.
The street was so
busy that Vin usually avoided it, and this day was even worse than
most. The arrival of the army had sparked a last-minute flurry of
buying and selling, the people trying to get ready for whatever was
to come. There was a grim tone to the atmosphere. Fewer street
performers, more yelling. Elend had ordered all eight city gates
barred, so flight was no longer an option. Vin wondered how many of
the people regretted their decision to stay.
She walked down the
street with a businesslike step, hands clasped to keep the
nervousness out of her posture. Even as a child—an urchin on
the streets of a dozen different cities—she hadn't liked
crowds. It was hard to keep track of so many people, hard to focus
with so much going on. As a child, she'd stayed near the edges of
crowds, hiding, venturing out to snatch the occasional fallen coin or
ignored bit of food.
She was different
now. She forced herself to walk with a straight back, and kept her
eyes from glancing down or looking for places to hide. She was
getting so much better—but seeing the crowds reminded her of
what she had once been. What she would always—at least in
part—still be.
As if in response
to her thoughts, a pair of street urchins scampered through the
throng, a large man in a baker's apron screaming at them. There were
still urchins in Elend's new world. In fact, as she considered it,
paying the skaa population probably made for a far better street life
for urchins. There were more pockets to pick, more people to distract
the shop owners, more scraps to go around, and more hands to feed
beggars.
It was difficult to
reconcile her childhood with such a life. To her, a child on the
street was someone who learned to be quiet and hide, someone who went
out at night to search through garbage. Only the most brave of
urchins had dared cut purses; skaa lives had been worthless to many
noblemen. During her childhood, Vin had known several urchins who
been killed or maimed by passing noblemen who found them offensive.
Elend's laws might
not have eliminated the poor, something he so much wanted to do, but
he had improved the lives of even the street urchins. For that—among
other things—she loved him.
There were still
some noblemen in the crowd, men who had been persuaded by Elend or
circumstances that their fortunes would be safer in the city than
without. They were desperate, weak, or adventuresome. Vin watched one
man pass, surrounded by a group of guards. He didn't give her a
second glance; to him, her simple clothing was reason enough to
ignore her. No noblewoman would dress as she did.
Is that what I
am? she wondered, pausing beside a shop window, looking over the
books inside—the sale of which had always been a small, but
profitable, market for the idle imperial nobility. She also used the
glass reflection to make certain no one snuck up behind her. Am I
a noblewoman?
It could be argued
that she was noble simply by association. The king himself loved
her—had asked her to marry him—and she had been trained
by the Survivor of Hathsin. Indeed, her father had been noble, even
if her mother had been skaa. Vin reached up, fingering the simple
bronze earring that was the only thing she had as a memento of
Mother.
It wasn't much.
But, then, Vin wasn't sure she wanted to think about her mother all
that much. The woman had, after all, tried to kill Vin. In fact, she
had killed Vin's full sister. Only the actions of Reen, Vin's
half brother, had saved her. He had pulled Vin, bloody, from the arms
of a woman who had shoved the earring into Vin's ear just moments
before.
And still Vin kept
it. As a reminder, of sorts. The truth was, she didn't feel like a
noblewoman. At times, she thought she had more in common with her
insane mother than she did with the aristocracy of Elend's world. The
balls and parties she had attended before the Collapse—they had
been a charade. A dreamlike memory. They had no place in this world
of collapsing governments and nightly assassinations. Plus, Vin's
part in the balls—pretending to be the girl Valette Renoux—had
always been a sham.
She pretended
still. Pretended not to be the girl who had grown up starving on the
streets, a girl who had been beaten far more often than she had been
befriended. Vin sighed, turning from the window. The next shop,
however, drew her attention despite herself.
It contained ball
gowns.
The shop was empty
of patrons; few thought of gowns on the eve of an invasion. Vin
paused before the open doorway, held almost as if she were metal
being Pulled. Inside, dressing dummies stood posed in majestic gowns.
Vin looked up at the garments, with their tight waists and tapering,
bell-like skirts. She could almost imagine she was at a ball, soft
music in the background, tables draped in perfect white, Elend
standing up on his balcony, leafing through a book . . . .
She almost went in.
But why bother? The city was about to be attacked. Besides, the
garments were expensive. It had been different when she'd spent
Kelsier's money. Now she spent Elend's money—and Elend's money
was the kingdom's money.
She turned from the
gowns and walked back out onto the street. Those aren't me
anymore. Valette is useless to Elend—he needs a Mistborn, not
an uncomfortable girl in a gown that she doesn't quite fill. Her
wounds from the night before, now firm bruises, were a reminder of
her place. They were healing well—she'd been burning pewter
heavily all day—but she'd be stiff for a while yet.
Vin quickened her
pace, heading for the livestock pens. As she walked, however, she
caught sight of someone tailing her.
Well, perhaps
"tailing" was too generous a word—the man certainly
wasn't doing a very good job of going unnoticed. He was balding on
top, but wore the sides of his hair long. He wore a simple skaa's
smock: a single-piece tan garment that was stained dark with ash.
Great, Vin
thought. There was another reason she avoided the market—or any
place where crowds of skaa gathered.
She sped up again,
but the man hurried as well. Soon, his awkward movements gained
attention—but, instead of cursing him, most people paused
reverently. Soon others joined him, and Vin had a small crowd
trailing her.
A part of her
wanted to just slap down a coin and shoot away. Yes, Vin
thought to herself wryly, use Allomancy in the daylight. That'll
make you inconspicuous.
So, sighing, she
turned to confront the group. None of them looked particularly
threatening. The men wore trousers and dull shirts; the women wore
one-piece, utilitarian dresses. Several more men wore single-piece,
ash-covered smocks.
Priests of the
Survivor.
"Lady Heir,"
one of them said, approaching and falling to his knees.
"Don't call me
that," Vin said quietly.
The priest looked
up at her. "Please. We need direction. We have cast off the Lord
Ruler. What do we do now?"
Vin took a step
backward. Had Kelsier understood what he was doing? He had built up
the skaa's faith in him, then had died a martyr to turn them in rage
against the Final Empire. What had he thought would happen after
that? Could he have foreseen the Church of the Survivor—had he
known that they would replace the Lord Ruler with Kelsier himself as
God?
The problem was,
Kelsier had left his followers with no doctrine. His only goal had
been to defeat the Lord Ruler; partially to get his revenge,
partially to seal his legacy, and partially—Vin hoped—because
he had wanted to free the skaa.
But now what? These
people must feel as she did. Set adrift, with no light to guide them.
Vin could not be
that light. "I'm not Kelsier," she said quietly, taking
another step backward.
"We know,"
one of the men said. "You're his heir—he passed on, and
this time you Survived."
"Please,"
a woman said, stepping forward, holding a young child in her arms.
"Lady Heir. If the hand that struck down the Lord Ruler could
touch my child . . . "
Vin tried to back
away farther, but realized she was up against another crowd of
people. The woman stepped closer, and Vin finally raised an uncertain
hand to the baby's forehead.
"Thank you,"
the woman said.
"You'll
protect us, won't you, Lady Heir?" asked a young man—no
older than Elend—with a dirty face but honest eyes. "The
priests say that you'll stop that army out there, that its soldiers
won't be able to enter the city while you're here."
That was too much
for her. Vin mumbled a halfhearted response, but turned and pushed
her way through the crowd. The group of believers didn't follow her,
fortunately.
She was breathing
deeply, though not from exertion, by the time she slowed. She moved
into an alley between two shops, standing in the shade, wrapping her
arms around herself. She had spent her life learning to remain
unnoticed, to be quiet and unimportant. Now she could be none of
those things.
What did the people
expect of her? Did they really think that she could stop an army by
herself? That was one lesson she'd learned very early into her
training: Mistborn weren't invincible. One man, she could kill. Ten
men could give her trouble. An army . . .
Vin held herself
and took a few calming breaths. Eventually, she moved back out onto
the busy street. She was near her destination now—a small,
open-sided tent surrounded by four pens. The merchant lounged by it,
a scruffy man who had hair on only half of his head—the right
half. Vin stood for a moment, trying to decide if the odd hairstyle
was due to disease, injury, or preference.
The man perked up
when he saw her standing at the edge of his pens. He brushed himself
off, throwing up a small amount of dust. Then he sauntered up to her,
smiling with what teeth he still had, acting as if he hadn't heard—or
didn't care—that there was an army just outside.
"Ah, young
lady," he said. "Lookin' for a pup? I've got some wee
scamps that any girl is sure to love. Here, let me grab one. You'll
agree it's the cutest thing you ever seen."
Vin folded her arms
as the man reached down to grab a puppy from one of the pens.
"Actually," she said, "I was looking for a wolfhound."
The merchant looked
up. "Wolfhound, miss? 'Tis no pet for a girl like yourself. Mean
brutes, those. Let me find you a nice bobbie. Nice dogs, those—smart,
too."
"No," Vin
said, drawing him up short. "You will bring me a wolfhound."
The man paused
again, looking at her, scratching himself in several undignified
places. "Well, I guess I can see . . . "
He wandered toward
the pen farthest from the street. Vin waited quietly, nose downturned
at the smell as the merchant yelled at a few of his animals,
selecting an appropriate one. Eventually, he pulled a leashed dog up
to Vin. It was a wolfhound, if a small one—but it had sweet,
docile eyes, and an obviously pleasant temperament.
"The runt of
the litter," the merchant said. "A good animal for a young
girl, I'd say. Will probably make an excellent hunter, too. These
wolfhounds, they can smell better than any beast you seen."
Vin reached for her
coin purse, but paused, looking down at the dog's panting face. It
almost seemed to be smiling at her.
"Oh, for the
Lord Ruler's sake," she snapped, pushing past the dog and
master, stalking toward the back pens.
"Young lady?"
the merchant asked, following uncertainly.
Vin scanned the
wolfhounds. Near the back, she spotted a massive black and gray
beast. It was chained to a post, and it regarded her defiantly, a low
growl rising in its throat.
Vin pointed. "How
much for that one in the back?"
"That?"
the merchant asked. "Good lady, that's a watchbeast. It's meant
to be set loose on a lord's grounds to attack anyone who enters! It's
the one of the meanest things you'll ever see!"
"Perfect,"
Vin said, pulling out some coins.
"Good lady, I
couldn't possibly sell you that beast. Not possibly at all. Why, I'll
bet it weighs half again as much as you do."
Vin nodded, then
pulled open the pen gate and strode in. The merchant cried out, but
Vin walked right up to the wolfhound. He began to bark wildly at her,
frothing.
Sorry about
this, Vin thought. Then, burning pewter, she ducked in and
slammed her fist into the animal's head.
The animal froze,
wobbled, then fell unconscious in the dirt. The merchant stopped up
short beside her, mouth open.
"Leash,"
Vin ordered.
He gave her one.
She used it to tie the wolfhound's feet together, and then—with
a flare of pewter—she threw the animal over her shoulders. She
cringed only slightly at the pain in her side.
This thing
better not get drool on my shirt, she thought, handing the
merchant some coins and walking back toward the palace.
Vin slammed the
unconscious wolfhound to the floor. The guards had given her some
strange looks as she entered the palace, but she was getting used to
those. She brushed off her hands.
"What is
that?" OreSeur asked. He'd made it back to her rooms at the
palace, but his current body was obviously unusable. He'd needed to
form muscles in places that men didn't normally have them to even
keep the skeleton together, and while he'd healed his wounds, his
body looked unnatural. He still wore the bloodstained clothing from
the night before.
"This,"
Vin said, pointing at the wolfhound, "is your new body."
OreSeur paused.
"That? Mistress, that is a dog."
"Yes,"
Vin said.
"I am a man."
"You're a
kandra," Vin said. "You can imitate flesh and muscle. What
about fur?"
The kandra did not
look pleased. "I cannot imitate it," he said, "but I
can use the beast's own fur, like I use its bones. However, surely
there is—"
"I'm not going
to kill for you, kandra," Vin said. "And even if I did kill
someone, I wouldn't let you . . . eat them. Plus, this will be more
inconspicuous. People will begin to talk if I keep replacing my
stewards with unknown men. I've been telling people for months that I
was thinking of dismissing you. Well, I'll tell them that I finally
did—nobody will think to realize that my new pet hound is
actually my kandra."
She turned, nodding
toward the carcass. "This will be very useful. People pay less
attention to hounds than they do to humans, and so you'll be able to
listen in on conversations."
OreSeur's frown
deepened. "I will not do this thing easily. You will need to
compel me, by virtue of the Contract."
"Fine,"
Vin said. "You're commanded. How long will it take?"
"A regular
body only takes a few hours," OreSeur said. "This could
take longer. Getting that much fur to look right will be
challenging."
"Get started,
then," Vin said, turning toward the door. On her way, however,
she noticed a small package sitting on her desk. She frowned, walking
over and taking off the lid. A small note sat inside.
Lady
Vin,
Here
is the next alloy you requested. Aluminum is very difficult to
acquire, but when a noble family recently left the city, I was able
to buy some of their diningware.
I
do not know if this one will work, but I believe it worth a try. I
have mixed the aluminum with four percent copper, and found the
outcome quite promising. I have read of this composition; it is
called duralumin.

Your servant, Terion
Vin smiled, setting
aside the note and removing the rest of the box's contents: a small
pouch of metal dust and a thin silvery bar, both presumably of this
"duralumin" metal. Terion was a master Allomantic
metallurgist. Though not an Allomancer himself, he had been mixing
alloys and creating dusts for Mistborn and Mistings for most of his
life.
Vin pocketed both
pouch and bar, then turned toward OreSeur. The kandra regarded her
with a flat expression.
"This came for
me today?" Vin asked, nodding to the box.
"Yes,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "A few hours ago."
"And you
didn't tell me?"
"I'm sorry,
Mistress," OreSeur said in his toneless way, "but you did
not command me to tell you if packages arrived."
Vin ground her
teeth. He knew how anxiously she'd been waiting for another alloy
from Terion. All of the previous aluminum alloys they'd tried had
turned out to be duds. It bothered her to know that there was another
Allomantic metal out there somewhere, waiting to be discovered. She
wouldn't be satisfied until she found it.
OreSeur just sat
where he was, bland expression on his face, unconscious wolfhound on
the floor in front of him.
"Just get to
work on that body," Vin said, spinning and leaving the room to
search for Elend.
Vin finally found
Elend in his study, going over some ledgers with a familiar figure.
"Dox!"
Vin said. He'd retired to his rooms soon after his arrival the day
before, and she hadn't seen much of him.
Dockson looked up
and smiled. Stocky without being fat, he had short dark hair and
still wore his customary half beard. "Hello, Vin."
"How was
Terris?" she asked.
"Cold,"
Dockson replied. "I'm glad to be back. Though I wish I hadn't
arrived to find that army here."
"Either way,
we're glad you've returned, Dockson," Elend said. "The
kingdom practically fell apart without you."
"That hardly
seems the case," Dockson said, closing his ledger and setting it
on the stack. "All things—and armies—considered, it
looks like the royal bureaucracy held together fairly well in my
absence. You hardly need me anymore!"
"Nonsense!"
Elend said.
Vin leaned against
the door, eyeing the two men as they continued their discussion. They
maintained their air of forced joviality. Both were dedicated to
making the new kingdom work, even if it meant pretending that they
liked each other. Dockson pointed at places in the ledgers, talking
about finances and what he'd discovered in the outlying villages
under Elend's control.
Vin sighed,
glancing across the room. Sunlight streamed through the room's
stained-glass rose window, throwing colors across the ledgers and
table. Even now, Vin still wasn't accustomed to the casual richness
of a noble keep. The window—red and lavender—was a thing
of intricate beauty. Yet, noblemen apparently found its like so
commonplace that they had put this one in the keep's back rooms, in
the small chamber that Elend now used as his study.
As one might
expect, the room was piled with stacks of books. Shelves lined the
walls from floor to ceiling, but they were no match for the sheer
volume of Elend's growing collection. She'd never cared much for
Elend's taste in books. They were mostly political or historical
works, things with topics as musty as their aged pages. Many of them
had once been forbidden by the Steel Ministry, but somehow the old
philosophers could make even salacious topics seem boring.
"Anyway,"
Dockson said, finally closing his ledgers. "I have some things
to do before your speech tomorrow, Your Majesty. Did Ham say there's
a city defense meeting that evening as well?"
Elend nodded.
"Assuming I can get the Assembly to agree not to hand the city
over to my father, we'll need to come up with a strategy to deal with
this army. I'll send someone for you tomorrow night."
"Good,"
Dockson said. With that, he nodded to Elend, winked at Vin, then made
his way from the cluttered room.
As Dockson shut the
door, Elend sighed, then relaxed back in his oversized plush chair.
Vin walked forward.
"He really is a good man, Elend."
"Oh, I realize
he is. Being a good man doesn't always make one likable, however."
"He's nice,
too," Vin said. "Sturdy, calm, stable. The crew relied on
him." Even though Dockson wasn't an Allomancer, he had been
Kelsier's right-hand man.
"He doesn't
like me, Vin," Elend said. "It's . . . very hard to get
along with someone who looks at me like that."
"You're not
giving him a fair chance," Vin complained, stopping beside
Elend's chair.
He looked up at
her, smiling wanly, his vest unbuttoned, his hair an absolute mess.
"Hum . . . " he said idly, taking her hand. "I really
like that shirt. Red looks good on you."
Vin rolled her
eyes, letting him gently pull her into the chair and kiss her. There
was a passion to the kiss—a need, perhaps, for something
stable. Vin responded, feeling herself relax as she pulled up against
him. A few minutes later, she sighed, feeling much better snuggled
into the chair beside him. He pulled her close, leaning the chair
back into the window's sunlight.
He smiled and
glanced at her. "That's a . . . new perfume you're wearing."
Vin snorted,
putting her head against his chest. "It's not perfume, Elend.
It's dog."
"Ah, good,"
Elend said. "I was worried that you'd departed from your senses.
Now, is there any particular reason why you smell like dog?"
"I went to the
market and bought one, then carried it back and fed it to OreSeur, so
it can be his new body."
Elend paused. "Why,
Vin. That's brilliant! Nobody will suspect a dog to be a spy. I
wonder if anyone's ever thought of that before . . . ."
"Someone must
have," Vin said. "I mean, it makes such sense. I suspect
those who thought of it, however, didn't share the knowledge."
"Good point,"
Elend said, relaxing back. Yet, from as close as they were, she could
still feel a tension in him.
Tomorrow's
speech, Vin thought. He's worried about it.
"I must say,
however," Elend said idly, "that I find it a bit
disappointing that you're not wearing dog-scented perfume.
With your social station, I could see some of the local noblewomen
trying to imitate you. That could be amusing indeed."
She leaned up,
looking at his smirking face. "You know, Elend—sometimes
it's bloody difficult to tell when you're teasing, and when you're
just being dense."
"That makes me
more mysterious, right?"
"Something
like that," she said, snuggling up against him again.
"Now, see, you
don't understand how clever that is of me," he said. "If
people can't tell when I'm being an idiot and when I'm being a
genius, perhaps they'll assume my blunders are brilliant political
maneuverings."
"As long as
they don't mistake your actual brilliant moves for blunders."
"That
shouldn't be difficult," Elend said. "I fear I have few
enough of those for people to mistake."
Vin looked up with
concern at the edge in his voice. He, however, smiled, shifting the
topic. "So, OreSeur the dog. Will he still be able to go out
with you at nights?"
Vin shrugged. "I
guess. I wasn't really planning on bringing him for a while."
"I'd like it
if you did take him," Elend said. "I worry about you out
there, every night, pushing yourself so hard."
"I can handle
it," Vin said. "Someone needs to watch over you."
"Yes,"
Elend said, "but who watches over you?"
Kelsier.
Even now, that was still her immediate reaction. She'd known him for
less than a year, but that year had been the first in her life that
she had felt protected.
Kelsier was dead.
She, like the rest of the world, had to live without him.
"I know you
were hurt when you fought those Allomancers the other night,"
Elend said. "It would be really nice for my psyche if I knew
someone was with you."
"A kandra's no
bodyguard," Vin said.
"I know,"
Elend said. "But they're incredibly loyal—I've never heard
of one breaking Contract. He'll watch out for you. I worry about you,
Vin. You wonder why I stay up so late, scribbling at my proposals? I
can't sleep, knowing that you might be out there fighting—or,
worse, lying somewhere in a street, dying because nobody was there to
help you."
"I take
OreSeur with me sometimes."
"Yes,"
Elend said, "but I know you find excuses to leave him behind.
Kelsier bought you the services of an incredibly valuable servant. I
can't understand why you work so hard to avoid him."
Vin closed her
eyes. "Elend. He ate Kelsier."
"So?"
Elend asked. "Kelsier was already dead. Besides, he himself gave
that order."
Vin sighed, opening
her eyes. "I just . . . don't trust that thing, Elend. The
creature is unnatural."
"I know,"
Elend said. "My father always kept a kandra. But, OreSeur is
something, at least. Please. Promise me you'll take him with you."
"All right.
But I don't think he's going to like the arrangement much either. He
and I didn't get along very well even when he was playing Renoux, and
I his niece."
Elend shrugged.
"He'll hold to his Contract. That's what is important."
"He holds to
the Contract," Vin said, "but only grudgingly. I swear that
he enjoys frustrating me."
Elend looked down
at her. "Vin, kandra are excellent servants. They don't do
things like that."
"No, Elend,"
Vin said. "Sazed was an excellent servant. He enjoyed
being with people, helping them. I never felt that he resented me.
OreSeur may do everything I command, but he doesn't like me; he never
has. I can tell."
Elend sighed,
rubbing her shoulder. "Don't you think you might be a little
irrational? There's no real reason to hate him so."
"Oh?" Vin
asked. "Just like there's no reason you shouldn't get along with
Dockson?"
Elend paused. Then
he sighed. "I guess you have a point," he said. He
continued to rub Vin's shoulder as he stared upward, toward the
ceiling, contemplative.
"What?"
Vin asked.
"I'm not doing
a very good job of this, am I?"
"Don't be
foolish," Vin said. "You're a wonderful king."
"I might be a
passable king, Vin, but I'm not him."
"Who?"
"Kelsier,"
Elend said quietly.
"Elend, nobody
expects you to be Kelsier."
"Oh?" he
said. "That's why Dockson doesn't like me. He hates noblemen;
it's obvious in the way that he talks, the way he acts. I don't know
if I really blame him, considering the life he's known. Regardless,
he doesn't think I should be king. He thinks that a skaa should be in
my place—or, even better, Kelsier. They all think that."
"That's
nonsense, Elend."
"Really? And
if Kelsier still lived, would I be king?"
Vin paused.
"You see? They
accept me—the people, the merchants, even the noblemen. But in
the back of their minds, they wish they had Kelsier instead."
"I don't wish
that."
"Don't you?"
Vin frowned. Then
she sat up, turning so that she was kneeling over Elend in the
reclined chair, their faces just inches apart. "Don't you ever
wonder that, Elend. Kelsier was my teacher, but I didn't love him.
Not like I love you."
Elend stared into
her eyes, then nodded. Vin kissed him deeply, then snuggled down
beside him again.
"Why not?"
Elend eventually asked.
"Well, he was
old, for one thing."
Elend chuckled. "I
seem to recall you making fun of my age as well."
"That's
different," Vin said. "You're only a few years older than
me—Kelsier was ancient."
"Vin,
thirty-eight is not ancient."
"Close
enough."
Elend chuckled
again, but she could tell that he wasn't satisfied. Why had
she chosen Elend, rather than Kelsier? Kelsier had been the
visionary, the hero, the Mistborn.
"Kelsier was a
great man," Vin said quietly as Elend began to stroke her hair.
"But . . . there were things about him, Elend. Frightening
things. He was intense, reckless, even a little bit cruel.
Unforgiving. He'd slaughter people without guilt or concern, just
because they upheld the Final Empire or worked for the Lord Ruler.
"I could love
him as a teacher and a friend. But I don't think I could ever
love—not really love—a man like that. I don't
blame him; he was of the streets, like me. When you struggle so hard
for life, you grow strong—but you can grow harsh, too. His
fault or not, Kelsier reminded me too much of men I . . . knew when I
was younger. Kell was a far better person than they—he really
could be kind, and he did sacrifice his life for the skaa. However,
he was just so hard."
She closed her
eyes, feeling Elend's warmth. "You, Elend Venture, are a good
man. A truly good man."
"Good men
don't become legends," he said quietly.
"Good men
don't need to become legends." She opened her eyes, looking up
at him. "They just do what's right anyway."
Elend smiled. Then
he kissed the top of her head and leaned back. They lay there for a
time, in a room warm with sunlight, relaxing.
"He saved my
life, once," Elend finally said.
"Who?"
Vin asked with surprise. "Kelsier?"
Elend nodded. "That
day after Spook and OreSeur were captured, the day Kelsier died.
There was a battle in the square when Ham and some soldiers tried to
free the captives."
"I was there,"
Vin said. "Hiding with Breeze and Dox in one of the alleyways."
"Really?"
Elend said, sounding a bit amused. "Because I came looking for
you. I thought that they'd arrested you, along with OreSeur—he
was pretending to be your uncle, then. I tried to get to the cages to
rescue you."
"You did what?
Elend, it was a battlefield in that square! There was an Inquisitor
there, for the Lord Ruler's sake!"
"I know,"
Elend said, smiling faintly. "See, that Inquisitor is the one
who tried to kill me. It had its axe raised and everything. And then
. . . Kelsier was there. He smashed into the Inquisitor, throwing it
to the ground."
"Probably just
a coincidence," Vin said.
"No,"
Elend said softly. "He meant it, Vin. He looked at me while he
struggled with the Inquisitor, and I saw it in his eyes. I've always
wondered about that moment; everyone tells me that Kelsier hated the
nobility even more than Dox does."
Vin paused. "He
. . . started to change a little at the end, I think."
"Change enough
that he'd risk himself to protect a random nobleman?"
"He knew that
I loved you," Vin said, smiling faintly. "I guess, in the
end, that proved stronger than his hatred."
"I didn't
realize . . . " He trailed off as Vin turned, hearing something.
Footsteps approaching. She sat up, and a second later, Ham poked his
head into the room. He paused when he saw Vin sitting in Elend's lap,
however.
"Oh," Ham
said. "Sorry."
"No, wait,"
Vin said. Ham poked his head back in, and Vin turned to Elend. "I
almost forgot why I came looking for you in the first place. I got a
new package from Terion today."
"Another
one?" Elend asked. "Vin, when are you going to give this
up?"
"I can't
afford to," she said.
"It can't be
all that important, can it?" he asked. "I mean, if
everybody's forgotten what that last metal does, then it must not be
very powerful."
"Either that,"
Vin said, "or it was so amazingly powerful that the Ministry
worked very hard to keep it a secret." She slid off of the chair
to stand up, then took the pouch and thin bar out of her pocket. She
handed the bar to Elend, who sat up in his plush chair.
Silvery and
reflective, the metal—like the aluminum from which it was
made—felt too light to be real. Any Allomancer who accidentally
burned aluminum had their other metal reserves stripped away from
them, leaving them powerless. Aluminum had been kept secret by the
Steel Ministry; Vin had only found out about it on the night when
she'd been captured by the Inquisitors, the same night she'd killed
the Lord Ruler.
They had never been
able to figure out the proper Allomantic alloy of aluminum.
Allomantic metals always came in pairs—iron and steel, tin and
pewter, copper and bronze, zinc and brass. Aluminum and . . .
something. Something powerful, hopefully. Her atium was gone. She
needed an edge.
Elend sighed,
handing back the bar. "The last time you tried to burn one of
those it left you sick for two days, Vin. I was terrified."
"It can't kill
me," Vin said. "Kelsier promised that burning a bad alloy
would only make me sick."
Elend shook his
head. "Even Kelsier was wrong on occasion, Vin. Didn't you say
that he misunderstood how bronze worked?"
Vin paused. Elend's
concern was so genuine that she felt herself being persuaded. However
. . .
When that army
attacks, Elend is going to die. The city's skaa might survive—no
ruler would be foolish enough to slaughter the people of such a
productive city. The king, however, would be killed. She couldn't
fight off an entire army, and she could do little to help with
preparations.
She did know
Allomancy, however. The better she got at it, the better she'd be
able to protect the man she loved.
"I have to try
it, Elend," she said quietly. "Clubs says that Straff won't
attack for a few days—he'll need that long to rest his men from
the march and scout the city for attack. That means I can't wait. If
this metal does make me sick, I'll be better in time to help
fight—but only if I try it now."
Elend's face grew
grim, but he did not forbid her. He had learned better than that.
Instead, he stood. "Ham, you think this is a good idea?"
Ham nodded. He was
a warrior; to him, her gamble would make sense. She'd asked him to
stay because she'd need someone to carry her back to her bed, should
this go wrong.
"All right,"
Elend said, turning back to Vin, looking resigned.
Vin climbed into
the chair, sat back, then took a pinch of the duralumin dust and
swallowed it. She closed her eyes, and felt at her Allomantic
reserves. The common eight were all there, well stocked. She didn't
have any atium or gold, nor did she have either of their alloys. Even
if she'd had atium, it was too precious to use except in an
emergency—and the other three had only marginal usefulness.
A new reserve
appeared. Just as one had the four times before. Each time she'd
burned an aluminum alloy, she'd immediately felt a blinding headache.
You'd think I'd have learned . . . she thought. Gritting her
teeth, she reached inside and burned the new alloy.
Nothing happened.
"Have you
tried it yet?" Elend asked apprehensively.
Vin nodded slowly.
"No headache. But . . . I'm not sure if the alloy is doing
anything or not."
"But it's
burning?" Ham asked.
Vin nodded. She
felt the familiar warmth from within, the tiny fire that told her
that a metal was burning. She tried moving about a bit, but couldn't
distinguish any change to her physical self. Finally she just looked
up and shrugged.
Ham frowned. "If
it didn't make you sick, then you've found the right alloy. Each
metal only has one valid alloy."
"Or," Vin
said, "that's what we've always been told."
Ham nodded. "What
alloy was this?"
"Aluminum and
copper," Vin said.
"Interesting,"
Ham said. "You don't feel anything at all?"
Vin shook her head.
"You'll have
to practice some more."
"Looks like
I'm lucky," Vin said, extinguishing the duralumin. "Terion
came up with forty different alloys he thought we could try, once we
had enough aluminum. This was only the fifth."
"Forty?"
Elend asked incredulously. "I wasn't aware that there were so
many metals you could make an alloy from!"
"You don't
have to have two metals to make an alloy," Vin said absently.
"Just one metal and something else. Look at steel—it's
iron and carbon."
"Forty . . . "
Elend repeated. "And you would have tried them all?"
Vin shrugged.
"Seemed like a good place to start."
Elend looked
concerned at that thought, but didn't say anything further. Instead,
he turned to Ham. "Anyway, Ham, was there something you wanted
to see us about?"
"Nothing
important," Ham said. "I just wanted to see if Vin was up
for some sparring. That army has me feeling antsy, and I figure Vin
could still use some practice with the staff."
Vin shrugged.
"Sure. Why not?"
"You want to
come, El?" Ham asked. "Get in some practice?"
Elend laughed. "And
face one of you two? I've got my royal dignity to think of!"
Vin frowned
slightly, looking up at him. "You really should practice more,
Elend. You barely know how to hold a sword, and you're terrible
with a dueling cane."
"Now, see, why
would I worry about that when I have you to protect me?"
Vin's concern
deepened. "We can't always be around you, Elend. I'd worry a lot
less if you were better at defending yourself."
He just smiled and
pulled her to her feet. "I'll get to it eventually, I promise.
But, not today—I've got too much to think about right now. How
about if I just come watch you two? Perhaps I'll pick up something by
observation—which is, by the way, the preferable method of
weapons training, since it doesn't involve me getting beaten up by a
girl."
Vin sighed, but
didn't press the point further.
I write this
record now, pounding it into a metal slab, because I am afraid.
Afraid for myself, yes—I admit to being human. If Alendi does
return from the Well of Ascension, I am certain that my death will be
one of his first objectives. He is not an evil man, but he is a
ruthless one. That is, I think, a product of what he has been
through.





6
ELEND LEANED DOWN
AGAINST THE railing, looking in at the sparring yard. Part of him did
wish to go out and practice with Vin and Ham. However, the larger
part of him just didn't see the point.
Any assassin
likely to come after me will be an Allomancer, he thought. I
could train ten years and be no match for one of them.
In the yard itself,
Ham took a few swings with his staff, then nodded. Vin stepped up,
holding her own staff, which was a good foot taller than she was.
Watching the two of them, Elend couldn't help remarking on the
disparity. Ham had the firm muscles and powerful build of a warrior.
Vin looked even thinner than usual, wearing only a tight buttoned
shirt and a pair of trousers, with no cloak to mask her size.
The inequality was
enhanced by Ham's next words. "We're practicing with the staff,
not practicing Pushing and Pulling. Don't use anything but pewter,
all right?"
Vin nodded.
It was the way they
often sparred. Ham claimed that there was no substitute for training
and practice, no matter how powerful an Allomancer one was. He let
Vin use pewter, however, because he said the enhanced strength and
dexterity was disorienting unless one was accustomed to it.
The sparring field
was like a courtyard. Situated in the palace barracks, it had an
open-sided hallway built around it. Elend stood in this, roof
overhead keeping the red sun out of his eyes. That was nice, for a
light ashfall had begun, and occasional flakes of ash floated down
from the sky. Elend crossed his arms on the railing. Soldiers passed
occasionally in the hallway behind, bustling with activity. Some,
however, paused to watch; Vin and Ham's sparring sessions were
something of a welcome diversion to the palace guards.
I should be
working on my proposal, Elend thought. Not standing here
watching Vin fight.
But . . . the
tension of the last few days had been so pressing that he was finding
it difficult to get up the motivation to do yet another
read-through of the speech. What he really needed was to just spend a
few moments thinking.
So, he simply
watched. Vin approached Ham warily, staff held in a firm, two-handed
stance. Once, Elend probably would have found trousers and shirt on a
lady to be inappropriate, but he'd been around Vin too long to still
be bothered by that. Ball gowns and dresses were beautiful—but
there was something right about Vin in simple garb. She wore
it more comfortably.
Besides, he kind of
liked how the tight clothing looked on her.
Vin usually let
others strike first, and this day was no exception. Staves rapped as
Ham engaged her, and despite her size, Vin held her own. After a
quick exchange, they both backed away, circling warily.
"My money's on
the girl."
Elend turned as he
noticed a form limping down the hallway toward him. Clubs stepped up
beside Elend, setting a ten-boxing coin down on the railing with a
snap. Elend smiled to the general, and Clubs scowled back—which
was generally accepted as Clubs's version of a smile. Dockson
excluded, Elend had taken quickly to the other members of Vin's crew.
Clubs, however, had taken a little getting used to. The stocky man
had a face like a gnarled toadstool, and he always seemed to be
squinting in displeasure—an expression usually matched by his
tone of voice.
However, he was a
gifted craftsman, not to mention an Allomancer—a Smoker,
actually, though he didn't get to use his power much anymore. For the
better part of a year, Clubs had acted as general of Elend's military
forces. Elend didn't know where Clubs had learned to lead soldiers,
but the man had a remarkable knack for it. He'd probably gotten the
skill in the same place that he'd acquired the scar on his leg—a
scar that produced the hobble from which Clubs drew his nickname.
"They're just
sparring, Clubs," Elend said. "There won't be a 'winner.'"
"They'll end
with a serious exchange," Clubs said. "They always do."
Elend paused.
"You're asking me to bet against Vin, you know," he noted.
"That could be unhealthy."
"So?"
Elend smiled,
pulling out a coin. Clubs still kind of intimidated him, and he
didn't want to risk offending the man.
"Where's that
worthless nephew of mine?" Clubs asked as he watched the
sparring.
"Spook?"
Elend asked. "He's back? How'd he get into the city?"
Clubs shrugged. "He
left something on my doorstep this morning."
"A gift?"
Clubs snorted. "It
was a woodcarving from a master carpenter up in Yelva City. The note
said, 'I just wanted to show you what real carpenters are up
to, old man.'"
Elend chuckled, but
trailed off as Clubs eyed him with a discomforting stare. "Whelp
was never this insolent before," Clubs muttered. "I swear,
you lot have corrupted the lad."
Clubs almost seemed
to be smiling. Or, was he serious? Elend couldn't ever decide if the
man was as crusty as he seemed, or if Elend was the butt of some
elaborate joke.
"How is the
army doing?" Elend finally asked.
"Terribly,"
Clubs said. "You want an army? Give me more than one year to
train it. Right now, I'd barely trust those boys against a mob of old
women with sticks."
Great, Elend
thought.
"Can't do much
right now, though," Clubs grumbled. "Straff is digging in
some cursory fortifications, but mostly he's just resting his men.
The attack will come by the end of the week."
In the courtyard,
Vin and Ham continued to fight. It was slow, for the moment, Ham
taking time to pause and explain principles or stances. Elend and
Clubs watched for a short time as the sparring gradually became more
intense, the rounds taking longer, the two participants beginning to
sweat as their feet kicked up puffs of ash in the packed, sooty
earth.
Vin gave Ham a good
contest despite the ridiculous differences in strength, reach, and
training, and Elend found himself smiling slightly despite himself.
She was something special—Elend had realized that when he'd
first seen her in the Venture ballroom, nearly two years before. He
was only now coming to realize how much of an understatement
"special" was.
A coin snapped
against the wooden railing. "My money's on Vin, too."
Elend turned with
surprise. The man who had spoken was a soldier who had been standing
with the others watching behind. Elend frowned. "Who—"
Then, Elend cut
himself off. The beard was wrong, the posture too straight, but the
man standing behind him was familiar. "Spook?" Elend asked
incredulously.
The teenage boy
smiled behind an apparently fake beard. "Wasing the where of
calling out."
Elend's head
immediately began to hurt. "Lord Ruler, don't tell me you've
gone back to the dialect?"
"Oh, just for
the occasional nostalgic quip," Spook said with a laugh. His
words bore traces of his Easterner accent; during the first few
months Elend had known the boy, Spook had been utterly
unintelligible. Fortunately, the boy had grown out of using his
street cant, just as he'd managed to grow out of most of his
clothing. Well over six feet tall, the sixteen-year-old young man
hardly resembled the gangly boy Elend had met a year before.
Spook leaned
against the railing beside Elend, adopting a teenage boy's lounging
posture and completely destroying his image as a soldier—which,
indeed, he wasn't.
"Why the
costume, Spook?" Elend asked with a frown.
Spook shrugged.
"I'm no Mistborn. We more mundane spies have to find ways to get
information without flying up to windows and listening outside."
"How long you
been standing there?" Clubs asked, glaring at his nephew.
"Since before
you got here, Uncle Grumbles," Spook said. "And, in answer
to your question, I got back a couple days ago. Before Dockson,
actually. I just thought I'd take a bit of a break before I went back
to duty."
"I don't know
if you've noticed, Spook," Elend said, "but we're at war.
There isn't a lot of time to take breaks."
Spook shrugged. "I
just didn't want you to send me away again. If there's going to be
war here, I want to be around. You know, for the excitement."
Clubs snorted. "And
where did you get that uniform?"
"Uh . . . Well
. . . " Spook glanced to the side, displaying just a hint of the
uncertain boy Elend had known.
Clubs grumbled
something about insolent boys, but Elend just laughed and clapped
Spook on the shoulder. The boy looked up, smiling; though he'd been
easy to ignore at first, he was proving as valuable as any of the
other members of Vin's former crew. As a Tineye—a Misting who
could burn tin to enhance his senses—Spook could listen to
conversations from far away, not to mention notice distant details.
"Anyway,
welcome back," Elend said. "What's the word from the west?"
Spook shook his
head. "I hate to sound too much like Uncle Crusty over there,
but the news isn't good. You know those rumors about the Lord Ruler's
atium being in Luthadel? Well, they're back. Stronger this time."
"I thought we
were past that!" Elend said. Breeze and his team had spent the
better part of six months spreading rumors and manipulating the
warlords into believing that the atium must have been hidden in
another city, since Elend hadn't found it in Luthadel.
"Guess not,"
Spook said. "And . . . I think someone's spreading these rumors
intentionally. I've been on the street long enough to sense a planted
story, and this rumor smells wrong. Someone really wants the warlords
to focus on you."
Great, Elend
thought. "You don't know where Breeze is, do you?"
Spook shrugged, but
he no longer seemed to be paying attention to Elend. He was watching
the sparring. Elend glanced back toward Vin and Ham.
As Clubs had
predicted, the two had fallen into a more serious contest. There was
no more instruction; there were no more quick, repetitive exchanges.
They sparred in earnest, fighting in a swirling melee of staffs and
dust. Ash flew around them, blown up by the wind of their attacks,
and even more soldiers paused in the surrounding hallways to watch.
Elend leaned
forward. There was something intense about a duel between two
Allomancers. Vin tried an attack. Ham, however, swung simultaneously,
his staff blurringly quick. Somehow, Vin got her own weapon up in
time, but the power of Ham's blow threw her back in a tumble. She hit
the ground on one shoulder. She gave barely a grunt of pain, however,
and somehow got a hand beneath her, throwing herself up to land on
her feet. She skidded for a moment, retaining her balance, holding
her staff up.
Pewter,
Elend thought. It made even a clumsy man dexterous. And, for a person
normally graceful like Vin . . .
Vin's eyes
narrowed, her innate stubbornness showing in the set of her jaw, the
displeasure in her face. She didn't like being beaten—even when
her opponent was obviously stronger than she was.
Elend stood up
straight, intending to suggest an end to the sparring. At that
moment, Vin dashed forward.
Ham brought his
staff up expectantly, swinging as Vin came within reach. She ducked
to the side, passing within inches of the attack, then brought her
weapon around and slammed it into the back of Ham's staff, throwing
him off balance. Then she ducked in for the attack.
Ham, however,
recovered quickly. He let the force of Vin's blow spin him around,
and he used the momentum to bring his staff around in a powerful blow
aimed directly at Vin's chest.
Elend cried out.
Vin jumped.
She didn't have
metal to Push against, but that didn't seem to matter. She sprang a
good seven feet in the air, easily cresting Ham's staff. She flipped
as the swing passed beneath her, her fingers brushing the air just
above the weapon, her own staff spinning in a one-handed grip.
Vin landed, her
staff already howling in a low swing, its tip throwing up a line of
ash as it ran along the ground. It slammed into the back of Ham's
legs. The blow swept Ham's feet out from beneath him, and he cried
out as he fell.
Vin jumped into the
air again.
Ham slammed to the
earth on his back, and Vin landed on his chest. Then, she calmly
rapped him on the forehead with the end of her staff. "I win."
Ham lay, looking
dazed, Vin crouching on his chest. Dust and ash settled quietly in
the courtyard.
"Damn . . . "
Spook whispered, voicing a sentiment that seemed to be shared by the
dozen or so watching soldiers.
Finally, Ham
chuckled. "Fine. You beat me—now, if you would, kindly get
me something to drink while I try to massage some feeling back into
my legs."
Vin smiled, hopping
off his chest and scampering away to do as requested. Ham shook his
head, climbing to his feet. Despite his words, he walked with barely
a limp; he'd probably have a bruise, but it wouldn't bother him for
long. Pewter not only enhanced one's strength, balance, and speed, it
also made one's body innately stronger. Ham could shrug off a blow
that would have shattered Elend's legs.
Ham joined them,
nodding to Clubs and punching Spook lightly on the arm. Then he
leaned against the railing and rubbed his left calf, cringing
slightly. "I swear, Elend—sometimes sparring with that
girl is like trying to fight with a gust of wind. She's never where I
think she'll be."
"How did she
do that, Ham?" Elend asked. "The jump, I mean. That leap
seemed inhuman, even for an Allomancer."
"Used steel,
didn't she?" Spook said.
Ham shook his head.
"No, I doubt it."
"Then how?"
Elend asked.
"Allomancers
draw strength from their metals," Ham said, sighing and putting
his foot down. "Some can squeeze out more than others—but
the real power comes from the metal itself, not the person's body."
Elend paused. "So?"
"So," Ham
said, "an Allomancer doesn't have to be physically strong to be
incredibly powerful. If Vin were a Feruchemist, it would be
different—if you ever see Sazed increase his strength,
his muscles will grow larger. But with Allomancy, all the strength
comes directly from the metal.
"Now, most
Thugs—myself included—figure that making their bodies
strong will only add to their power. After all, a muscular man
burning pewter will be that much stronger than a regular man of the
same Allomantic power."
Ham rubbed his
chin, eyeing the passage Vin had left through. "But . . . well,
I'm beginning to think that there might be another way. Vin's a thin
little thing, but when she burns pewter, she grows several times
stronger than any normal warrior. She packs all that strength into a
small body, and doesn't have to bother with the weight of massive
muscles. She's like . . . an insect. Far stronger than her mass or
her body would indicate. So, when she jumps, she can jump."
"But you're
still stronger than she is," Spook said.
Ham nodded. "And
I can make use of that—assuming I can ever hit her. That's
getting harder and harder to do."
Vin finally
returned, carrying a jug of chilled juice—apparently she'd
decided to go all the way to the keep, rather than grabbing some of
the warm ale kept on hand in the courtyard. She handed a flagon to
Ham, and had thought to bring cups for Elend and Clubs.
"Hey!"
Spook said as she poured. "What about me?"
"That beard
looks silly on you," Vin said as she poured.
"So I don't
get anything to drink?"
"No."
Spook paused. "Vin,
you're a strange girl."
Vin rolled her
eyes; then she glanced toward the water barrel in the corner of the
courtyard. One of the tin cups lying beside it lurched into the air,
shooting across the courtyard. Vin stuck her hand out, catching it
with a slapping sound, then set it on the railing before Spook.
"Happy?"
"I will be
once you pour me something to drink," Spook said as Clubs
grunted, taking a slurp from his own cup. The old general then
reached over, sliding two of the coins off the railing and pocketing
them.
"Hey, that's
right!" Spook said. "You owe me, El. Pay up."
Elend lowered his
cup. "I never agreed to the bet."
"You paid
Uncle Irritable. Why not me?"
Elend paused, then
sighed, pulling out a ten-boxing coin and setting it beside Spook's.
The boy smiled, plucking both up in a smooth street-thief gesture.
"Thanks for winning the bout, Vin," he said with a wink.
Vin frowned at
Elend. "You bet against me?"
Elend laughed,
leaning across the railing to kiss her. "I didn't mean it. Clubs
bullied me."
Clubs snorted at
that comment, downed the rest of his juice, then held out his cup for
a refill. When Vin didn't respond, he turned to Spook and gave the
boy a telling scowl. Finally, Spook sighed, picking up the jug to
refill the cup.
Vin was still
regarding Elend with dissatisfaction.
"I'd be
careful, Elend," Ham said with a chuckle. "She can hit
pretty hard . . . ."
Elend nodded. "I
should know better than to antagonize her when there are weapons
lying around, eh?"
"Tell me about
it," Ham said.
Vin sniffed at that
comment, rounding the railing so that she could stand next to Elend.
Elend put his arm around her, and as he did, he caught a bare flash
of envy in Spook's eyes. Elend suspected that the boy'd had a crush
on Vin for some time—but, well, Elend couldn't really blame him
for that.
Spook shook his
head. "I've got to find myself a woman."
"Well, that
beard isn't going to help," Vin said.
"It's just a
disguise, Vin," Spook said. "El, I don't suppose you could
give me a title or something?"
Elend smiled. "I
don't think that will matter, Spook."
"It worked for
you."
"Oh, I don't
know," Elend said. "Somehow, I think Vin fell in love with
me despite my title, rather than because of it."
"But you had
others before her," Spook said. "Noble girls."
"A couple,"
Elend admitted.
"Though Vin
has a habit of killing off her competition," Ham quipped.
Elend laughed.
"Now, see, she only did that once. And I think Shan deserved
it—she was, after all, trying to assassinate me at the time."
He looked down fondly, eyeing Vin. "Though, I do have to admit,
Vin is a bit hard on other women. With her around, everybody
else looks bland by comparison."
Spook rolled his
eyes. "It's more interesting when she kills them off."
Ham chuckled,
letting Spook pour him some more juice. "Lord Ruler only knows
what she'd do to you if you ever tried to leave her, Elend."
Vin stiffened
immediately, pulling him a little tighter. She'd been abandoned far
too many times. Even after what they'd been through, even after his
proposal of marriage, Elend had to keep promising Vin that he wasn't
going to leave her.
Time to change
the topic, Elend thought, the joviality of the moment fading.
"Well," he said, "I think I'm going to go visit the
kitchens and get something to eat. You coming, Vin?"
Vin glanced at the
sky—likely checking to see how soon it would grow dark.
Finally, she nodded.
"I'll come,"
Spook said.
"No you
won't," Clubs said, grabbing the boy by the back of the neck.
"You're going to stay right here and explain exactly where you
got one of my soldiers' uniforms."
Elend chuckled,
leading Vin away. Truth be told, even with the slightly sour end of
conversation, he felt better for having come to watch the sparring.
It was strange how the members of Kelsier's crew could laugh and make
light, even during the most terrible of situations. They had a way of
making him forget about his problems. Perhaps that was a holdover
from the Survivor. Kelsier had, apparently, insisted on laughing, no
matter how bad the situation. It had been a form of rebellion to him.
None of that made
the problems go away. They still faced an army several times larger
than their own, in a city that they could barely defend. Yet, if
anyone could survive such a situation, it would be Kelsier's crew.
Later that night,
having filled her stomach at Elend's insistence, Vin made her way
with Elend to her rooms.
There, sitting on
the floor, was a perfect replica of the wolfhound she had bought
earlier. It eyed her, then bowed its head. "Welcome back,
Mistress," the kandra said in a growling, muffled voice.
Elend whistled
appreciatively, and Vin walked in a circle around the creature. Each
hair appeared to have been placed perfectly. If it hadn't spoken, one
would never have been able to tell it wasn't the original dog.
"How do you
manage the voice?" Elend asked curiously.
"A voice box
is a construction of flesh, not bone, Your Majesty," OreSeur
said. "Older kandra learn to manipulate their bodies, not just
replicate them. I still need to digest a person's corpse to memorize
and re-create their exact features. However, I can improvise some
things."
Vin nodded. "Is
that why making this body took you so much longer than you'd said?"
"No,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "The hair. I'm sorry I didn't warn
you—placing fur like this takes a great deal of precision and
effort."
"Actually, you
did mention it," Vin said, waving her hand.
"What do you
think of the body, OreSeur?" Elend asked.
"Honestly,
Your Majesty?"
"Of course."
"It is
offensive and degrading," OreSeur said.
Vin raised an
eyebrow. That's forward of you, Renoux, she thought. Feeling
a little belligerent today, are we?
He glanced at her,
and she tried—unsuccessfully—to read his canine
expression.
"But,"
Elend said, "you'll wear the body anyway, right?"
"Of course,
Your Majesty," OreSeur said. "I would die before breaking
the Contract. It is life."
Elend nodded to
Vin, as if he'd just made a major point.
Anyone can claim
loyalty, Vin thought. If someone has a "Contract" to
ensure their honor, then all the better. That makes the surprise more
poignant when they do turn on you.
Elend was obviously
waiting for something. Vin sighed. "OreSeur, we'll be spending
more time together in the future."
"If that is
what you wish, Mistress."
"I'm not sure
if it is or not," Vin said. "But it's going to happen
anyway. How well can you move about in that body?"
"Well enough,
Mistress."
"Come on,"
she said, "let's see if you can keep up."
I am also
afraid, however, that all I have known—that my story—will
be forgotten. I am afraid for the world that is to come. Afraid that
my plans will fail.
Afraid of a doom
worse, even, than the Deepness.





7
SAZED NEVER THOUGHT
HE'D HAVE reason to appreciate dirt floors. However, they proved
remarkably useful in writing instruction. He drew several words in
the dirt with a long stick, giving his half-dozen students a model.
They proceeded to scribble their own copies, rewriting the words
several times.
Even after living
among various groups of rural skaa for a year, Sazed was still
surprised by their meager resources. There wasn't a single piece of
chalk in the entire village, let alone ink or paper. Half the
children ran around naked, and the only shelters were the
hovels—long, one-room structures with patchy roofs. The skaa
had farming tools, fortunately, but no manner of bows or slings for
hunting.
Sazed had led a
scavenging mission up to the plantation's abandoned manor. The
leavings had been meager. He'd suggested that the village elders
relocate their people to the manor itself for the winter, but he
doubted they would do so. They had visited the manor with
apprehension, and many hadn't been willing to leave Sazed's side. The
place reminded them of lords—and lords reminded them of pain.
His students
continued to scribble. He had spent quite a bit of effort explaining
to the elders why writing was so important. Finally, they had chosen
him some students—partially, Sazed was sure, just to appease
him. He shook his head slowly as he watched them write. There was no
passion in their learning. They came because they were ordered, and
because "Master Terrisman" willed it, not because of any
real desire for education.
During the days
before the Collapse, Sazed had often imagined what the world would be
like once the Lord Ruler was gone. He had pictured the Keepers
emerging, bringing forgotten knowledge and truths to an excited,
thankful populace. He'd imagined teaching before a warm hearth at
night, telling stories to an eager audience. He'd never paused to
consider a village, stripped of its working men, whose people were
too exhausted at night to bother with tales from the past. He'd never
imagined a people who seemed more annoyed by his presence than
thankful.
You must be
patient with them, Sazed told himself sternly. His dreams now
seemed like hubris. The Keepers who had come before him, the hundreds
who had died keeping their knowledge safe and quiet, had never
expected praise or accolades. They had performed their great task
with solemn anonymity.
Sazed stood up and
inspected his students' writings. They were getting better—they
could recognize all of the letters. It wasn't much, but it was a
start. He nodded to the group, dismissing them to help prepare the
evening meal.
They bowed, then
scattered. Sazed followed them out, then realized how dim the sky
was; he had probably kept his students too late. He shook his head as
he strolled between the hill-like hovels. He again wore his steward's
robes, with their colorful V-shaped patterns, and he had put in
several of his earrings. He kept to the old ways because they were
familiar, even though they were also a symbol of oppression. How
would future Terris generations dress? Would a lifestyle forced upon
them by the Lord Ruler become an innate part of their culture?
He paused at the
edge of the village, glancing down the corridor of the southern
valley. It was filled with blackened soil occasionally split by brown
vines or shrubs. No mist, of course; mist came only during the night.
The stories had to be mistakes. The thing he'd seen had to have been
a fluke.
And what did it
matter if it wasn't? It wasn't his duty to investigate such things.
Now that the Collapse had come, he had to disperse his knowledge, not
waste his time chasing after foolish stories. Keepers were no longer
investigators, but instructors. He carried with him thousands of
books—information about farming, about sanitation, about
government, and about medicine. He needed to give these things to the
skaa. That was what the Synod had decided.
And yet, a part of
Sazed resisted. That made him feel deeply guilty; the villagers
needed his teachings, and he wished dearly to help them. However . .
. he felt that he was missing something. The Lord Ruler was
dead, but the story did not seem finished. Was there something he had
overlooked?
Something larger,
even, than the Lord Ruler? Something so large, so big, that it was
effectively invisible?
Or, do I just
want there to be something else? he wondered. I've spent
most of my adult life resisting and fighting, taking risks that the
other Keepers called mad. I wasn't content with feigned
subservience—I had to get involved in the rebellion.
Despite that
rebellion's success, Sazed's brethren still hadn't forgiven him for
his involvement. He knew that Vin and the others saw him as docile,
but compared with other Keepers he was a wild man. A reckless,
untrustworthy fool who threatened the entire order with his
impatience. They had believed their duty was to wait, watching for
the day when the Lord Ruler was gone. Feruchemists were too rare to
risk in open rebellion.
Sazed had
disobeyed. Now he was having trouble living the peaceful life of a
teacher. Was that because some subconscious part of him knew that the
people were still in danger, or was it because he simply couldn't
accept being marginalized?
"Master
Terrisman!"
Sazed spun. The
voice was terrified. Another death in the mists? he thought
immediately.
It was eerie how
the other skaa remained inside their hovels despite the horrified
voice. A few doors creaked, but nobody rushed out in alarm—or
even curiosity—as the screamer dashed up to Sazed. She was one
of the fieldworkers, a stout, middle-aged woman. Sazed checked his
reserves as she approached; he had on his pewtermind for strength, of
course, and a very small steel ring for speed. Suddenly, he wished
he'd chosen to wear just a few more bracelets this day.
"Master
Terrisman!" the woman said, out of breath. "Oh, he's come
back! He's come for us!"
"Who?"
Sazed asked. "The man who died in the mists?"
"No, Master
Terrisman. The Lord Ruler."
Sazed found him
standing just outside the village. It was already growing dark, and
the woman who'd fetched Sazed had returned to her hovel in fear.
Sazed could only imagine how the poor people felt—trapped by
the onset of the night and its mist, yet huddled and worried at the
danger that lurked outside.
And an ominous
danger it was. The stranger waited quietly on the worn road, wearing
a black robe, standing almost as tall as Sazed himself. The man was
bald, and he wore no jewelry—unless, of course, you counted the
massive iron spikes that had been driven point-first through his
eyes.
Not the Lord Ruler.
A Steel Inquisitor.
Sazed still didn't
understand how the creatures continued to live. The spikes were wide
enough to fill the Inquisitor's entire eye sockets; the nails had
destroyed the eyes, and pointed tips jutted out the back of the
skull. No blood dripped from the wounds—for some reason, that
made them seem more strange.
Fortunately, Sazed
knew this particular Inquisitor. "Marsh," Sazed said
quietly as the mists began to form.
"You are a
very difficult person to track, Terrisman," Marsh said—and
the sound of his voice shocked Sazed. It had changed, somehow,
becoming more grating, more gristly. It now had a grinding quality,
like that of a man with a cough. Just like the other Inquisitors
Sazed had heard.
"Track?"
Sazed asked. "I wasn't planning on others needing to find me."
"Regardless,"
Marsh said, turning south. "I did. You need to come with me."
Sazed frowned.
"What? Marsh, I have a work to do here."
"Unimportant,"
Marsh said, turning back, focusing his eyeless gaze on Sazed.
Is it me, or has
he become stranger since we last met? Sazed shivered. "What
is this about, Marsh?"
"The
Conventical of Seran is empty."
Sazed paused. The
Conventical was a Ministry stronghold to the south—a place
where the Inquisitors and high obligators of the Lord Ruler's
religion had retreated after the Collapse.
"Empty?"
Sazed asked. "That isn't likely, I think."
"True
nonetheless," Marsh said. He didn't use body language as he
spoke—no gesturing, no movements of the face.
"I . . . "
Sazed trailed off. What kinds of information, wonders, secrets,
the Conventical's libraries must hold.
"You must come
with me," Marsh said. "I may need help, should my brethren
discover us."
My brethren.
Since when are the Inquisitors Marsh's "brethren"?
Marsh had infiltrated their numbers as part of Kelsier's plan to
overthrow the Final Empire. He was a traitor to their numbers, not
their brother.
Sazed hesitated.
Marsh's profile looked . . . unnatural, even unnerving, in the dim
light. Dangerous.
Don't be
foolish, Sazed chastised himself. Marsh was Kelsier's brother—the
Survivor's only living relative. As an Inquisitor, Marsh had
authority over the Steel Ministry, and many of the obligators had
listened to him despite his involvement with the rebellion. He had
been an invaluable resource for Elend Venture's fledgling government.
"Go get your
things," Marsh said.
My place is
here, Sazed thought. Teaching the people, not gallivanting
across the countryside, chasing my own ego.
And yet . . .
"The mists are
coming during the day," Marsh said quietly.
Sazed looked up.
Marsh was staring at him, the heads of his spikes shining like round
disks in the last slivers of sunlight. Superstitious skaa thought
that Inquisitors could read minds, though Sazed knew that was
foolish. Inquisitors had the powers of Mistborn, and could therefore
influence other people's emotions—but they could not
read minds.
"Why did you
say that?" Sazed asked.
"Because it is
true," Marsh said. "This is not over, Sazed. It has not yet
begun. The Lord Ruler . . . he was just a delay. A cog. Now that he
is gone, we have little time remaining. Come with me to the
Conventical—we must search it while we have the opportunity."
Sazed paused, then
nodded. "Let me go explain to the villagers. We can leave
tonight, I think."
Marsh nodded, but
he didn't move as Sazed retreated to the village. He just remained,
standing in the darkness, letting the mist gather around him.
It all comes
back to poor Alendi. I feel bad for him, and for all the things he
has been forced to endure. For what he has been forced to become.





8
VIN THREW HERSELF
INTO THE mists. She soared in the night air, passing over darkened
homes and streets. An occasional, furtive bob of light glowed in the
mists—a guard patrol, or perhaps an unfortunate late-night
traveler.
Vin began to
descend, and she immediately flipped a coin out before herself. She
Pushed against it, her weight plunging it down into the quiet depths.
As soon as it hit the street below, her Push forced her upward, and
she sprang back into the air. Soft Pushes were very difficult—so
each coin she Pushed against, each jump she made, threw her into the
air at a terrible speed. The jumping of a Mistborn wasn't like a
bird's flight. It was more like the path of a ricocheting arrow.
And yet, there was
a grace to it. Vin breathed deeply as she arced above the city,
tasting the cool, humid air. Luthadel by day smelled of burning
forges, sun-heated refuse, and fallen ash. At night, however, the
mists gave the air a beautiful chill crispness—almost a
cleanliness.
Vin crested her
jump, and she hung for just a brief moment as her momentum changed.
Then she began to plummet back toward the city. Her mistcloak tassels
fluttered around her, mingling with her hair. She fell with her eyes
closed, remembering her first few weeks in the mist, training beneath
Kelsier's relaxed—yet watchful—tutelage. He had given her
this. Freedom. Despite two years as a Mistborn, she had never lost
the sense of intoxicating wonder she felt when soaring through the
mists.
She burned steel
with her eyes closed; the lines appeared anyway, visible as a spray
of threadlike blue lines set against the blackness of her eyelids.
She picked two, pointing downward behind her, and Pushed, throwing
herself into an other arc.
What did I ever
do without this? Vin thought, opening her eyes, whipping her
mistcloak behind her with a throw of the arm.
Eventually, she
began to fall again, and this time she didn't toss a coin. She burned
pewter to strengthen her limbs, and landed with a thump on the wall
surrounding Keep Venture's grounds. Her bronze showed no signs of
Allomantic activity nearby, and her steel revealed no unusual
patterns of metal moving toward the keep.
Vin crouched on the
dark wall for a few moments, right at the edge, toes curling over the
lip of the stone. The rock was cool beneath her feet, and her tin
made her skin far more sensitive than normal. She could tell that the
wall needed to be cleaned; lichens were beginning to grow along its
side, encouraged by the night's humidity, protected from the day's
sun by a nearby tower.
Vin remained quiet,
watching a slight breeze push and churn the mists. She heard the
movement on the street below before she saw it. She tensed, checking
her reserves, before she was able to discern a wolfhound's shape in
the shadows.
She dropped a coin
over the side of the wall, then leapt off. OreSeur waited as she
landed quietly before him, using a quick Push on the coin to slow her
descent.
"You move
quickly," Vin noted appreciatively.
"All I had to
do was round the palace grounds, Mistress."
"Still, you
stuck closer to me this time than you ever did before. That
wolfhound's body is faster than a human one."
OreSeur paused. "I
suppose," he admitted.
"Think you can
follow me through the city?"
"Probably,"
OreSeur said. "If you lose me, I will return to this point so
you can retrieve me."
Vin turned and
dashed down a side street. OreSeur then took off quietly behind her,
following.
Let's see how
well he does in a more demanding chase, she thought, burning
pewter and increasing her speed. She sprinted along the cool cobbles,
barefoot as always. A normal man could never have maintained such a
speed. Even a trained runner couldn't have kept pace with her, for he
would have quickly tired.
With pewter,
however, Vin could run for hours at breakneck speeds. It gave her
strength, lent her an unreal sense of balance, as she shot down the
dark, mist-ruled street, a flurry of cloak tassels and bare feet.
OreSeur kept pace.
He loped beside her in the night, breathing heavily, focused on his
running.
Impressive,
Vin thought, then turned down an alleyway. She easily jumped the
six-foot-tall fence at the back, passing into the garden of some
lesser nobleman's mansion. She spun, skidding on the wet grass, and
watched.
OreSeur crested the
top of the wooden fence, his dark, canine form dropping through the
mists to land in the loam before Vin. He came to a stop, resting on
his haunches, waiting quietly, panting. There was a look of defiance
in his eyes.
All right,
Vin thought, pulling out a handful of coins. Follow this.
She dropped a coin
and threw herself backward up into the air. She spun in the mists,
twisting, then Pushed herself sideways off a well spigot. She landed
on a rooftop and jumped off, using another coin to Push herself over
the street below.
She kept going,
leaping from rooftop to rooftop, using coins when necessary. She
occasionally shot a glance behind, and saw a dark form struggling to
keep up. He'd rarely followed her as a human; usually, she had
checked in with him at specific points. Moving out in the night,
jumping through the mists . . . this was the true domain of the
Mistborn. Did Elend understand what he asked when he told her to
bring OreSeur with her? If she stayed down on the streets, she'd
expose herself.
She landed on a
rooftop, jarring to a sudden halt as she grabbed hold of the
building's stone lip, leaning out over a street three stories below.
She maintained her balance, mist swirling below her. All was silent.
Well, that
didn't take long, she thought. I'll just have to explain to
Elend that—
OreSeur's canine
form thumped to the rooftop a short distance away. He padded over to
her, then sat down on his haunches, waiting expectantly.
Vin frowned. She'd
traveled for a good ten minutes, running over rooftops with the speed
of a Mistborn. "How . . . how did you get up here?" she
demanded.
"I jumped atop
a shorter building, then used it to reach these tenements, Mistress,"
OreSeur said. "Then I followed you along the rooftops. They are
placed so closely together that it was not difficult to jump from one
to another."
Vin's confusion
must have shown, for OreSeur continued. "I may have been . . .
hasty in my judgment of these bones, Mistress. They certainly do have
an impressive sense of smell—in fact, all of their senses are
quite keen. It was surprisingly easy to track you, even in the
darkness."
"I . . . see,"
Vin said. "Well, that's good."
"Might I ask,
Mistress, the purpose of that chase?"
Vin shrugged. "I
do this sort of thing every night."
"It seemed
like you were particularly intent on losing me. It will be very
difficult to protect you if you don't let me stay near you."
"Protect me?"
Vin asked. "You can't even fight."
"The Contract
forbids me from killing a human," OreSeur said. "I could,
however, go for help should you need it."
Or throw me a
bit of atium in a moment of danger, Vin admitted. He's
right—he could be useful. Why am I so determined to leave him
behind?
She glanced over at
OreSeur, who sat patiently, his chest puffing from exertion. She
hadn't realized that kandra even needed to breathe.
He ate Kelsier.
"Come on,"
Vin said. She jumped from the building, Pushing herself off a coin.
She didn't pause to see if OreSeur followed.
As she fell, she
reached for another coin, but decided not to use it. She Pushed
against a passing window bracket instead. Like most Mistborn, she
often used clips—the smallest denomination of coin—to
jump. It was very convenient that the economy supplied a prepackaged
bit of metal of an ideal size and weight for jumping and shooting. To
most Mistborn, the cost of a thrown clip—or even a bag of
them—was negligible.
But Vin was not
most Mistborn. In her younger years, a handful of clips would have
seemed an amazing treasure. That much money could have meant food for
weeks, if she scrimped. It also could have meant pain—even
death—if the other thieves had discovered that she'd obtained
such a fortune.
It had been a long
time since she'd gone hungry. Though she still kept a pack of dried
foods in her quarters, she did so more out of habit than anxiety. She
honestly wasn't sure what she thought of the changes within her. It
was nice not to have to worry about basic necessities—and yet,
those worries had been replaced by ones far more daunting. Worries
involving the future of an entire nation.
The future of . . .
a people. She landed on the city wall—a structure much higher,
and much better fortified, than the small wall around Keep Venture.
She hopped up on the battlements, fingers seeking a hold on one of
the merlons as she leaned over the edge of the wall, looking out over
the army's fires.
She had never met
Straff Venture, but she had heard enough from Elend to be worried.
She sighed, pushing
back off the battlement and hopping onto the wall walk. Then she
leaned back against one of the merlons. To the side, OreSeur trotted
up the wall steps and approached. Once again, he went down onto his
haunches, watching patiently.
For better or for
worse, Vin's simple life of starvation and beatings was gone. Elend's
fledgling kingdom was in serious danger, and she'd burned away the
last of his atium trying to keep herself alive. She'd left him
exposed—not just to armies, but to any Mistborn assassin who
tried to kill him.
An assassin like
the Watcher, perhaps? The mysterious figure who had interfered in her
fight against Cett's Mistborn. What did he want? Why did he watch
her, rather than Elend?
Vin sighed,
reaching into her coin pouch and pulling out her bar of duralumin.
She still had the reserve of it within her, the bit she'd swallowed
earlier.
For centuries, it
had been assumed that there were only ten Allomantic metals: the four
base metals and their alloys, plus atium and gold. Yet, Allomantic
metals always came in pairs—a base metal and an alloy. It had
always bothered Vin that atium and gold were considered a pair, when
neither was an alloy of the other. In the end, it had turned out that
they weren't actually paired; they each had an alloy. One of
these—malatium, the so-called Eleventh Metal—had
eventually given Vin the clue she'd needed to defeat the Lord Ruler.
Somehow Kelsier had
found out about malatium. Sazed still hadn't been able to trace the
"legends" that Kelsier had supposedly uncovered teaching of
the Eleventh Metal and its power to defeat the Lord Ruler.
Vin rubbed her
finger on the slick surface of the duralumin bar. When Vin had last
seen Sazed, he'd seemed frustrated—or, at least, as frustrated
as Sazed ever grew—that he couldn't find even hints regarding
Kelsier's supposed legends. Though Sazed claimed he'd left Luthadel
to teach the people of the Final Empire—as was his duty as a
Keeper—Vin hadn't missed the fact that Sazed had gone south.
The direction in which Kelsier claimed to have discovered the
Eleventh Metal.
Are there rumors
about this metal, too? Vin wondered, rubbing the duralumin. Ones
that might tell me what it does?
Each of the other
metals produced an immediate, visible effect; only copper, with its
ability to create a cloud that masked an Allomancer's powers from
others, didn't have an obvious sensory clue to its purpose. Perhaps
duralumin was similar. Could its effect be noticed only by another
Allomancer, one trying to use his or her powers on Vin? It was the
opposite of aluminum, which made metals disappear. Did that mean
duralumin would make other metals last longer?
Movement.
Vin just barely
caught the hint of shadowed motion. At first, a primal bit of terror
rose in her: Was it the misty form, the ghost in the darkness she had
seen the night before?
You were just
seeing things, she told herself forcefully. You were too
tired. And, in truth, the glimmer of motion proved too dark—too
real—to be the same ghostly image.
It was him.
He stood atop one
of the watchtowers—not crouching, not even bothering to hide.
Was he arrogant or foolish, this unknown Mistborn? Vin smiled, her
apprehension turning to excitement. She prepared her metals, checking
her reserves. Everything was ready.
Tonight I catch
you, my friend.
Vin spun, throwing
out a spray of coins. Either the Mistborn knew he'd been spotted, or
he was ready for an attack, for he easily dodged. OreSeur hopped to
his feet, spinning, and Vin whipped her belt free, dropping her
metals.
"Follow if you
can," she whispered to the kandra, then sprang into the darkness
after her prey.
The Watcher shot
away, bounding through the night. Vin had little experience chasing
another Mistborn; her only real chance to practice had come during
Kelsier's training sessions. She soon found herself struggling to
keep up with the Watcher, and she felt a stab of guilt for what she
had done to OreSeur earlier. She was learning firsthand how difficult
it was to follow a determined Mistborn through the mists. And she
didn't have the advantage of a dog's sense of smell.
She did, however,
have tin. It made the night clearer and enhanced her hearing. With
it, she managed to follow the Watcher as he moved toward the center
of the city. Eventually, he let himself drop down toward one of the
central fountain squares. Vin fell as well, hitting the slick
cobblestones with a flare of pewter, then dodging to the side as he
threw out a handful of coins.
Metal rang against
stone in the quiet night, coins plinging against statues and
cobblestones. Vin smiled as she landed on all fours; then she bounded
forward, jumping with pewter-enhanced muscles and Pulling one of the
coins up into her hand.
Her opponent leaped
backward, landing on the edge of a nearby fountain. Vin landed, then
dropped her coin, using it to throw herself upward over the Watcher's
head. He stooped, watching warily as she passed over him.
Vin caught of one
of the bronze statues at the center of the fountain itself and pulled
herself to a stop atop it. She crouched on the uneven footing,
looking down at her opponent. He stood balanced on one foot at the
edge of the fountain, quiet and black in the churning mists. There
was a . . . challenge in his posture.
Can you catch
me? he seemed to ask.
Vin whipped her
daggers out and jumped free of the statue. She Pushed herself
directly toward the Watcher, using the cool bronze as an anchor.
The Watcher used
the statue as well, Pulling himself forward. He shot just beneath
Vin, throwing up a wave of water, his incredible speed letting him
skid like a stone across the fountain's still surface. As he jumped
clear of the water, he Pushed himself away, shooting across the
square.
Vin landed on the
fountain lip, chill water spraying across her. She growled, jumping
after the Watcher.
As he landed, he
spun and whipped out his own daggers. She rolled beneath his first
attack, then brought her daggers up in a two-handed double jab. The
Watcher jumped quickly out of the way, his daggers sparkling and
dropping beads of fountain water. He had a lithe power about him as
he came to rest in a crouch. His body looked tense and sure. Capable.
Vin smiled again,
breathing quickly. She hadn't felt like this since . . . since those
nights so long ago, when she'd sparred with Kelsier. She remained in
a crouch, waiting, watching the mist curl between her and her
opponent. He was of medium height, had a wiry build, and he wore no
mistcloak.
Why no cloak?
Mistcloaks were the ubiquitous mark of her kind, a symbol of pride
and security.
She was too far
away to distinguish his face. She thought she saw a hint of a smile,
however, as he jumped backward and Pushed against another statue. The
chase began again.
Vin followed him
through the city, flaring steel, landing on roofs and streets,
Pushing herself in great arcing leaps. The two bounded through
Luthadel like children on a playground—Vin trying to cut off
her opponent, he cleverly managing to stay just a little bit ahead of
her.
He was good. Far
better than any Mistborn she had known or faced, save perhaps for
Kelsier. However, she'd grown greatly in skill since she'd sparred
with the Survivor. Could this newcomer be even better? The thought
thrilled her. She'd always considered Kelsier a paradigm of
Allomantic ability, and it was easy to forget that he'd had his
powers for only a couple of years before the Collapse.
That's the same
amount of time that I've been training, Vin realized as she
landed in a small, cramped street. She frowned, crouching, remaining
still. She'd seen the Watcher fall toward this street.
Narrow and poorly
maintained, the street was practically an alleyway, lined on both
sides by three- and four-story buildings. There was no motion—either
the Watcher had slipped away or he was hiding nearby. She burned
iron, but the iron-lines revealed no motion.
However, there was
another way . . . .
Vin pretended to
still be looking around, but she turned on her bronze, flaring it,
trying to pierce the coppercloud that she thought might be close.
And there he was.
Hiding in a room behind the mostly closed shutters of a derelict
building. Now that she knew where to look, she saw the bit of metal
he'd probably used to jump up to the second story, the latch he must
have Pulled on to quickly close the shutters behind him. He'd
probably scouted this street beforehand, always intending to lose her
here.
Clever, Vin
thought.
He couldn't have
anticipated her ability to pierce copperclouds. But, attacking him
now might give away that ability. Vin stood quietly, thinking of him
crouching above, tensely waiting for her to move off.
She smiled.
Reaching inside, she examined the duralumin reserve. There was a
possible way to discover if burning it created some change in the way
she looked to another Mistborn. The Watcher was likely burning most
of his metals, trying to determine what her next move would be.
So, thinking
herself incredibly clever, Vin burned the fourteenth metal.
A massive explosion
sounded in her ears. Vin gasped, dropping to her knees in shock.
Everything grew bright around her, as if some crack of energy had
illuminated the entire street. And she felt cold; frigidly,
stunningly cold.
She moaned, trying
to make sense of the sound. It . . . it wasn't an explosion, but many
explosions. A rhythmic thudding, like a drum pounding just beside
her. Her heart-beat. And the breeze, loud as a howling wind. The
scratchings of a dog searching for food. Someone snoring in their
sleep. It was as if her hearing had been magnified a hundred times.
And then . . .
nothing. Vin fell backward against the cobblestones, the sudden rush
of light, coldness, and sound evaporating. A form moved in the
shadows nearby, but she couldn't make it out—she couldn't see
in the darkness anymore. Her tin was . . .
Gone, she
realized, coming to. My entire store of tin has been burned away.
I was . . . burning it, when I turned on the duralumin.
I burned them
both at once. That's the secret. The duralumin had burned away
all her tin in a single, massive burst. It had made her senses
amazingly acute for a very short time, but had stolen away her entire
reserve. And, looking, she could see that her bronze and her
pewter—the other metals she'd been burning at the time—were
gone as well. The onrush of sensory information had been so vast that
she hadn't noticed the effects of the other two.
Think about it
later, Vin told herself, shaking her head. She felt like she
should be deafened and blinded, but she wasn't. She was just a bit
stunned.
The dark form moved
up beside her in the mists. She didn't have time to recover; she
pushed herself to her feet, stumbling. The form, it was too short to
be the Watcher. It was . . .
"Mistress, do
you require assistance?"
Vin paused as
OreSeur padded up to her, then sat on his haunches.
"You . . .
managed to follow," Vin said.
"It was not
easy, Mistress," OreSeur said flatly. "Do you require
assistance?"
"What? No, no
assistance." Vin shook her head, clearing her mind. "I
guess that's one thing I didn't think of by making you a dog. You
can't carry metals for me now."
The kandra cocked
his head, then padded over into an alleyway. He returned a moment
later with something in his mouth. Her belt.
He dropped it by
her feet, then returned to his waiting position. Vin picked up the
belt, pulling off one of her extra metal vials. "Thank you,"
she said slowly. "That is very . . . thoughtful of you."
"I fulfill my
Contract, Mistress," the kandra said. "Nothing more."
Well, this is
more than you've ever done before, she thought, downing a vial
and feeling her reserves return. She burned tin, restoring her night
vision, releasing a veil of tension from her mind; since she'd
discovered her powers, she'd never had to go out at night in complete
darkness.
The shutters of the
Watcher's room were open; he had apparently fled during her fit. Vin
sighed.
"Mistress!"
OreSeur snapped.
Vin spun. A man
landed quietly behind her. He looked . . . familiar, for some reason.
He had a lean face—topped with dark hair—and his head was
cocked slightly in confusion. She could see the question in his eyes.
Why had she fallen down?
Vin smiled. "Maybe
I just did it to lure you closer," she whispered—softly,
yet loud enough that she knew tin-enhanced ears would hear her.
The Mistborn
smiled, then tipped his head to her as if in respect.
"Who are you?"
Vin asked, stepping forward.
"An enemy,"
he replied, holding up a hand to ward her back.
Vin paused. Mist
swirled between them on the quiet street. "Why, then, did you
help me fight those assassins?"
"Because,"
he said. "I'm also insane."
Vin frowned, eyeing
the man. She had seen insanity before in the eyes of beggars. This
man was not insane. He stood proudly, eyes controlled as he regarded
her in the darkness.
What kind of
game is he playing? she wondered.
Her instincts—a
lifetime's worth of instincts—warned her to be wary. She had
only just learned to trust her friends, and she wasn't about to offer
the same privilege to a man she had met in the night.
And yet, it had
been over a year since she'd spoken with another Mistborn. There were
conflicts within her that she couldn't explain to the others. Even
Mistings, like Ham and Breeze, couldn't understand the strange dual
life of a Mistborn. Part assassin, part bodyguard, part noblewoman .
. . part confused, quiet girl. Did this man have similar troubles
with his identity?
Perhaps she could
make an ally out of him, bringing a second Mistborn to the defense of
the Central Dominance. Even if she couldn't, she certainly couldn't
afford to fight him. A spar in the night was one thing, but if their
contest grew dangerous, atium might come into play.
If that happened,
she'd lose.
The Watcher studied
her with a careful eye. "Answer something for me," he said
in the mists.
Vin nodded.
"Did you
really kill Him?"
"Yes,"
Vin whispered. There was only one person he could mean.
He nodded slowly.
"Why do you play their games?"
"Whose games?"
The Watcher
gestured into the mists, toward Keep Venture.
"Those aren't
games," Vin said. "It's no game when the people I love are
in danger."
The Watcher stood
quietly, then shook his head, as if . . . disappointed. Then, he
pulled something from his sash.
Vin jumped back
immediately. The Watcher, however, simply flipped a coin to the
ground between them. It bounced a couple of times, coming to a rest
on the cobbles. Then, the Watcher Pushed himself backward into the
air.
Vin didn't follow.
She reached up, rubbing her head; she still felt like she should have
a headache.
"You're
letting him go?" OreSeur asked.
Vin nodded. "We're
done for tonight. He fought well."
"You sound
almost respectful," the kandra said.
Vin turned,
frowning at the hint of disgust in the kandra's voice. OreSeur sat
patiently, displaying no further emotion.
She sighed, tying
her belt around her waist. "We're going to need to come up with
a harness or something for you," she said. "I want you to
carry extra metal vials for me, like you did as a human."
"A harness
won't be necessary, Mistress," OreSeur said.
"Oh?"
OreSeur rose,
padding forward. "Please get out one of your vials."
Vin did as
requested, pulling out a small glass vial. OreSeur stopped, then
turned one shoulder toward her. As she watched, the fur parted and
the flesh itself split, showing forth veins and layers of skin. Vin
pulled back a bit.
"There is no
need to be worried, Mistress," OreSeur said. "My flesh is
not like your own. I have more . . . control over it, you might say.
Place the metal vial inside my shoulder."
Vin did as asked.
The flesh sealed around the vial, obscuring it from view.
Experimentally, Vin burned iron. No blue lines appeared pointing
toward the hidden vial. Metal inside of a person's stomach couldn't
be affected by another Allomancer; indeed, metal piercing a body,
like Inquisitor spikes or Vin's own earring, couldn't be Pushed or
Pulled by someone else. Apparently, the same rule applied to metals
hidden within a kandra.
"I will
deliver this to you in an emergency," OreSeur said.
"Thank you,"
Vin said.
"The Contract,
Mistress. Do not give me thanks. I do only what I am required."
Vin nodded slowly.
"Let's go back to the palace, then," she said. "I want
to check on Elend."
But, let me
begin at the beginning. I met Alendi first in Khlennium; he was a
young lad then, and had not yet been warped by a decade spent leading
armies.





9
MARSH HAD CHANGED.
THERE WAS something . . . harder about the former Seeker. Something
in the way he always seemed to be staring at things Sazed couldn't
see, something in his blunt responses and terse language.
Of course, Marsh
had always been a straightforward man. Sazed eyed his friend as the
two strode down the dusty highway. They had no horses; even if Sazed
had possessed one, most beasts wouldn't go near an Inquisitor.
What did Spook
say that Marsh's nickname was? Sazed thought to himself as they
walked. Before his transformation, they used to call him . . .
Ironeyes. The name that had turned out to be chillingly
prophetic. Most of the others found Marsh's transformed state
discomforting, and had left him isolated. Though Marsh hadn't seemed
to mind the treatment, Sazed had made a special effort to befriend
the man.
He still didn't
know if Marsh appreciated the gesture or not. They did seem to get
along well; both shared an interest in scholarship and history, and
both were interested in the religious climate of the Final Empire.
And, he did come
looking for me, Sazed thought. Of course, he did claim that he
wanted help in case the Inquisitors weren't all gone from the
Conventical of Seran. It was a weak excuse. Despite his powers as
a Feruchemist, Sazed was no warrior.
"You should be
in Luthadel," Marsh said.
Sazed looked up.
Marsh had spoken bluntly, as usual, without preamble. "Why do
you say that?" Sazed asked.
"They need you
there."
"The rest of
the Final Empire has need of me too, Marsh. I am a Keeper—one
group of people should not be able to monopolize all of my time."
Marsh shook his
head. "These peasants, they will forget your passing. No one
will forget the things that will soon happen in the Central
Dominance."
"You would be
surprised, I think, at what men can forget. Wars and kingdoms may
seem important now, but even the Final Empire proved mortal. Now that
it has fallen, the Keepers have no business being involved in
politics." Most would say we never had any business being
involved in politics at all.
Marsh turned toward
him. Those eyes, sockets filled entirely with steel. Sazed did not
shiver, but he felt distinctly uncomfortable.
"And your
friends?" Marsh asked.
This touched on
something more personal. Sazed looked away, thinking of Vin, and of
his vow to Kelsier that he would protect her. She needs little
protection now, he thought. She's grown more adept at
Allomancy than even Kelsier was. And yet, Sazed knew that there
were modes of protection that didn't relate to fighting. These
things—support, counsel, kindness—were vital to every
person, and most especially to Vin. So much rested on that poor
girl's shoulders.
"I have . . .
sent help," Sazed said. "What help I can."
"Not good
enough," Marsh said. "The things happening in Luthadel are
too important to ignore."
"I am not
ignoring them, Marsh," Sazed said. "I am simply performing
my duty as best I can."
Marsh finally
turned away. "The wrong duty. You will return to Luthadel once
we are finished here."
Sazed opened his
mouth to argue, but said nothing. What was there to say? Marsh was
right. Though he had no proof, Sazed knew that there were
important things happening in Luthadel—things that would
require his aid to fight. Things that likely affected the future of
the entire land once known as the Final Empire.
So, he closed his
mouth and trudged after Marsh. He would return to Luthadel, proving
himself a rebel once again. Perhaps, in the end, he would realize
that there was no ghostly threat facing the world—that he had
simply returned because of his own selfish desire to be with his
friends.
In fact, he hoped
that proved to be the truth. The alternative made him very
uncomfortable.
Alendi's height
struck me the first time I saw him. Here was a man who towered over
others, a man who—despite his youth and his humble
clothing—demanded respect.





10
THE ASSEMBLY HALL
WAS in the former Steel Ministry Canton of Finance headquarters. It
was a low-ceilinged space, more of a large lecture room than an
assembly hall. There were rows of benches fanning out in front of a
raised stage. On the right side of the stage, Elend had constructed a
tier of seats for the Assembly members. On the left of the stage, he
had constructed a single lectern for speakers.
The lectern faced
the Assemblymen, not the crowd. The common people were, however,
encouraged to attend. Elend thought that everyone should be
interested in the workings of their government; it pained him that
the Assembly's weekly meetings usually had a small audience.
Vin's seat was on
the stage, but at the back, directly opposite the audience. From her
vantage with the other bodyguards, she would look past the lectern
toward the crowd. Another row of Ham's guards—in regular
clothing—sat in the first row of the audience, providing a
first line of protection. Elend had balked at Vin's demands to having
guards both in front of the stage and behind it—he thought that
bodyguards sitting right behind the speakers would be distracting.
Ham and Vin, however, had insisted. If Elend was going to stand up in
front of a crowd every week, Vin wanted to be certain she could keep
a close eye on him—and on those watching him.
Getting to her
chair, therefore, required Vin to walk across the stage. Stares
followed her. Some of the watching crowd were interested in the
scandal; they assumed that she was Elend's mistress, and a king
sleeping with his personal assassin made for good gossip. Others were
interested in the politics; they wondered how much influence Vin had
over Elend, and whether they could use her to get the king's ear.
Still others were curious about the growing legends; they wondered if
a girl like Vin could really have slain the Lord Ruler.
Vin hurried her
pace. She passed the Assemblymen and found her seat next to Ham,
who—despite the formal occasion—still wore a simple vest
with no shirt. Sitting next to him in her trousers and shirt, Vin
didn't feel quite so out of place.
Ham smiled,
clapping her affectionately on the shoulder. She had to force herself
not to jump at the touch. It wasn't that she disliked Ham—quite
the opposite, actually. She loved him as she did all of the former
members of Kelsier's band. It was just that . . . well, she had
trouble explaining it, even to herself. Ham's innocent gesture made
her want to squirm. It seemed to her that people shouldn't be so
casual with the way that they touched others.
She pushed those
thoughts away. She had to learn to be like other people. Elend
deserved a woman who was normal.
He was already
there. He nodded to Vin as he noticed her arrival, and she smiled.
Then he turned back to speaking quietly with Lord Penrod, one of the
noblemen in the Assembly.
"Elend will be
happy," Vin whispered. "Place is packed."
"They're
worried," Ham said quietly. "And worried people pay more
attention to things like this. Can't say I'm happy—all these
people make our job harder."
Vin nodded,
scanning the audience. The crowd was a strangely mixed one—a
collection of different groups who would never have met together
during the days of the Final Empire. A major part were noblemen, of
course. Vin frowned, thinking of how often various members of the
nobility tried to manipulate Elend, and of the promises he made to
them . . . .
"What's that
look for?" Ham asked, nudging her.
Vin eyed the Thug.
Expectant eyes twinkled in his firm, rectangular face. Ham had an
almost supernatural sense when it came to arguments.
Vin sighed. "I
don't know about this, Ham."
"This?"
"This,"
Vin said quietly, waving her hand at the Assembly. "Elend tries
so hard to make everyone happy. He gives so much away—his
power, his money . . . ."
"He just wants
to see that everyone is treated fairly."
"It's more
than that, Ham," Vin said. "It's like he's determined to
make everyone a nobleman."
"Would that be
such a bad thing?"
"If everyone
is a nobleman, then there is no such thing as a nobleman. Everyone
can't be rich, and everyone can't be in charge. That's just
not the way things work."
"Perhaps,"
Ham said thoughtfully. "But, doesn't Elend have a civic duty to
try and make sure justice is served?"
Civic duty?
Vin thought. I should have known better than to talk to Ham about
something like this . . . .
Vin looked down. "I
just think he could see that everyone was treated well without having
an Assembly. All they do is argue and try to take his power away. And
he lets them."
Ham let the
discussion die, and Vin turned back to her study of the audience. It
appeared that a large group of mill workers had arrived first and
managed to get the best seats. Early in the Assembly's
history—perhaps ten months before—the nobility had sent
servants to reserve seats for them, or had bribed people to give up
their places. As soon as Elend had discovered this, however, he had
forbidden both practices.
Other than the
noblemen and the mill workers, there was a large number of the "new"
class. Skaa merchants and craftsmasters, now allowed to set their own
prices for their services. They were the true winners in Elend's
economy. Beneath the Lord Ruler's oppressive hand, only the few most
extraordinarily skilled skaa had been able to rise to positions of
even moderate comfort. Without those restrictions, these same people
had quickly proven to have abilities and acumen far above their noble
counterparts'. They represented a faction in the Assembly at least as
powerful as that of the nobility.
Other skaa peppered
the crowd. They looked much the same as they had before Elend's rise
to power. While noblemen generally wore suits—complete with
dayhats and coats—these skaa wore simple trousers. Some of them
were still dirty from their day's labor, their clothing old, worn,
and stained with ash.
And yet . . . there
was something different about them. It wasn't in their
clothing, but their postures. They sat a little straighter, their
heads held a little higher. And they had enough free time to attend
an Assembly meeting.
Elend finally stood
to begin the meeting. He had let his attendants dress him this
morning, and the result was attire that was almost completely free of
dishevelment. His suit fit well, all the buttons were done up, and
his vest was of an appropriate dark blue. His hair was even neatly
styled, the short, brown curls lying flat.
Normally, Elend
would begin the meeting by calling on other speakers, Assemblymen who
would drone on for hours about various topics like taxation rates or
city sanitation. However, this day, there were more pressing matters.
"Gentlemen,"
Elend said. "I beg your leave to depart from our usual agenda
this afternoon, in the light of our current . . . state of city
affairs."
The group of
twenty-four Assemblymen nodded, a few muttering things under their
breath. Elend ignored them. He was comfortable before crowds, far
more comfortable than Vin would ever be. As he unrolled his speech,
Vin kept one eye on the crowd, watching for reactions or problems.
"The dire
nature of our situation should be quite obvious," Elend said,
beginning the speech he had prepared earlier. "We face a danger
that this city has never known. Invasion and siege from an outside
tyrant.
"We are a new
nation, a kingdom founded on principles unknown during the days of
the Lord Ruler. Yet, we are already a kingdom of tradition. Freedom
for the skaa. Rule by our own choice and of our own design. Noblemen
who don't have to cower before the Lord Ruler's obligators and
Inquisitors.
"Gentlemen,
one year is not enough. We have tasted freedom, and we need time to
savor it. During the last month, we have frequently discussed and
argued regarding what to do should this day arrive. Obviously, we are
of many minds on the issue. Therefore, I ask for a vote of
solidarity. Let us promise ourselves, and these people, that we will
not give this city over to a foreign power without due consideration.
Let us resolve to gather more information, to seek for other avenues,
and even to fight should it be deemed necessary."
The speech went on,
but Vin had heard it a dozen times as Elend practiced it. As he
spoke, she found herself eying the crowd. She was most worried about
the obligators she saw sitting in the back. They showed little
reaction to the negative light in which Elend's remarks cast them.
She'd never
understood why Elend allowed the Steel Ministry to continue teaching.
It was the last real remnant of the Lord Ruler's power. Most
obligators obstinately refused to lend their knowledge of bureaucracy
and administration to Elend's government, and they still regarded
skaa with contempt.
And yet, Elend let
them remain. He maintained a strict rule that they were not allowed
to incite rebellion or violence. However, he also didn't eject them
from the city, as Vin had suggested. Actually, if the choice had been
solely hers, she probably would have executed them.
Eventually, Elend's
speech drew to a close, and Vin turned her attention back to him.
"Gentlemen," he said, "I make this proposal out of
faith, and I make it in the names of those we represent. I ask for
time. I propose that we forgo all votes regarding the future of the
city until a proper royal delegation has been allowed to meet with
the army outside and determine what, if any, opportunity there is for
negotiations."
He lowered his
sheet, looking up, waiting for comments.
"So,"
said Philen, one of the merchants on the Assembly. "You're
asking us to give you the power to decide the city's fate."
Philen wore his rich suit so well that an observer would never have
known that he'd first put one on about a year ago.
"What?"
Elend asked. "I said nothing of the sort—I'm simply asking
for more time. To meet with Straff."
"He's rejected
all of our earlier messages," said another Assemblyman. "What
makes you think he'll listen now?"
"We're
approaching this wrong!" said one of the noble representatives.
"We should be resolving to beg Straff Venture not to
attack, not resolving to meet with him and chat. We need to establish
quickly that we're willing to work with him. You've all seen that
army. He's planning to destroy us!"
"Please,"
Elend said, raising a hand. "Let us stay on topic!"
One of the other
Assemblymen—one of the skaa—spoke up, as if he hadn't
heard Elend. "You say that because you're noble," he said,
pointing at the noble Elend had interrupted. "It's easy for you
to talk about working with Straff, since you've got very little to
lose!"
"Very little
to lose?" the nobleman said. "I and all of my house could
be executed for supporting Elend against his father!"
"Bah,"
said one of the merchants. "This is all pointless. We should
have hired mercenaries months ago, as I'd suggested."
"And where
would we have gotten the funds for that?" asked Lord Penrod,
senior of the noble Assemblymen.
"Taxes,"
the merchant said with a wave of his hand.
"Gentlemen!"
Elend said; then, louder, "Gentlemen!"
This garnered him
some small measure of attention.
"We have
to make a decision," Elend said. "Stay focused, if you
please. What of my proposal?"
"It's
pointless," said Philen the merchant. "Why should we wait?
Let's just invite Straff into the city and be done. He's going to
take it anyway."
Vin sat back as the
men began to argue again. The problem was, the merchant Philen—as
little as she liked him—had a point. Fighting was looking like
a very unattractive option. Straff had such a large army. Would
stalling really do that much good?
"Look, see,"
Elend said, trying to get their attention again—and only
partially succeeding. "Straff is my father. Maybe I could talk
to him. Get him to listen? Luthadel was his home for years. Perhaps I
can convince him not to attack it."
"Wait,"
said one of the skaa representatives. "What of the food issue?
Have you seen what the merchants are charging for grain? Before we
worry about that army, we should talk about bringing prices down."
"Always
blaming us for your problems," one of the merchant Assemblymen
said, pointing. And the squabbling began again. Elend slumped just
slightly behind the lectern. Vin shook her head, feeling sorry for
Elend as the discussion degenerated. This was what often happened at
Assembly meetings; it seemed to her that they simply didn't give
Elend the respect he deserved. Perhaps that was his own fault, for
elevating them to his near equals.
Finally, the
discussion wound down, and Elend got out a piece of paper, obviously
planning to record the vote on his proposal. He did not look
optimistic.
"All right,"
Elend said. "Let's vote. Please remember—giving me time
will not play our hand. It will simply give me a chance to try
and make my father reconsider his desire to take our city away from
us."
"Elend, lad,"
said Lord Penrod. "We all lived here during the Lord Ruler's
reign. We all know what kind of man your father is. If he wants this
city, he is going to take it. All we can decide, then, is how
to best give up. Perhaps we can find a way for the people to retain
some freedom under his rule."
The group sat
quietly, and for the first time nobody brought up a new squabble. A
few of them turned toward Penrod, who sat with a calm, in-control
expression. Vin knew little of the man. He was one of the more
powerful noblemen who had remained in the city after the Collapse,
and he was politically conservative. However, she had never heard him
speak derogatively of the skaa, which was probably why he was so
popular with the people.
"I speak
bluntly," Penrod said, "for it is the truth. We are not in
a position to bargain."
"I agree with
Penrod," Philen said, jumping in. "If Elend wants to meet
with Straff Venture, then I guess that's his right. As I understand
it, kingship grants him authority to negotiate with foreign monarchs.
However, we don't have to promise not to give Straff the city."
"Master
Philen," Lord Penrod said. "I think you misjudged my
intent. I said that giving up the city was inevitable—but that
we should try to gain as much from it as possible. That means
at least meeting with Straff to assess his disposition. Voting to
give him the city now would be to play our hand too soon."
Elend looked up,
looking hopeful for the first time since the discussion had first
degenerated. "So, you support my proposal?" he asked.
"It is an
awkward way to achieve the pause I think necessary," Penrod
said. "But . . . seeing as how the army is already here, then I
doubt we have time for anything else. So, yes, Your Majesty. I
support your proposal."
Several other
members of the Assembly nodded as Penrod spoke, as if giving the
proposal consideration for the first time. That Penrod has too
much power, Vin thought, eyes narrowing as she regarded the
elderly statesman. They listen to him more than they do Elend.
"Should we
vote, then?" one of the other Assemblymen asked.
And they did. Elend
recorded votes as they moved down the line of Assemblymen. The eight
noblemen—seven plus Elend—voted for the proposal, giving
Penrod's opinion a great deal of weight. The eight skaa were mostly
for it, and the merchants mostly against it. In the end, however,
Elend got the two-thirds vote he needed.
"Proposal
accepted," Elend said, making the final tally, looking a bit
surprised. "The Assembly divests itself of the right to
surrender the city until after the king has met with Straff Venture
in official parlay."
Vin sat back in her
seat, trying to decide what she thought of the vote. It was good that
Elend had gotten his way, but the manner in which he'd achieved it
bothered her.
Elend finally
relinquished the lectern, sitting and letting a disgruntled Philen
take the lead. The merchant read a proposal calling for a vote to
turn control of city food stockpiles over to the merchants. However,
this time Elend himself led the dissent, and the arguing began again.
Vin watched with interest. Did Elend even realize how much like the
others he acted while he was arguing against their proposals?
Elend and a few of
the skaa Assemblymen managed to filibuster long enough that the lunch
break arrived with no vote cast. The people in the audience stood,
stretching, and Ham turned toward her. "Good meeting, eh?"
Vin just shrugged.
Ham chuckled. "We
really have to do something about your ambivalence toward civic duty,
kid."
"I already
overthrew one government," Vin said. "I figure that takes
care of my 'civic duty' for a while."
Ham smiled, though
he kept a wary eye on the crowd—as did Vin. Now, with everyone
moving about, would be the perfect time for an attempt on Elend's
life. One person in particular caught her attention, and she frowned.
"Be back in a
few seconds," she said to Ham, rising.
"You did the
right thing, Lord Penrod," Elend said, standing beside the older
nobleman, whispering quietly as break proceeded. "We need more
time. You know what my father will do to this city if he takes it."
Lord Penrod shook
his head. "I didn't do this for you, son. I did it because I
wanted to make certain that fool Philen didn't hand the city over
before the nobility extracted promises from your father about our
rights to title."
"Now, see,"
Elend said, holding up a finger. "There has to be another way!
The Survivor would never have given this city away without a fight."
Penrod frowned, and
Elend paused, quietly cursing himself. The old lord was a
traditionalist—quoting the Survivor at him would have little
positive effect. Many of the noblemen felt threatened by Kelsier's
influence with the skaa.
"Just think
about it," Elend said, glancing to the side as Vin approached.
She waved him away from the Assemblymen seats, and he excused
himself. He crossed the stage, joining her. "What is it?"
he asked quietly.
"Woman at the
back," Vin said quietly, eyes suspicious. "Tall one, in the
blue."
The woman in
question wasn't hard to find; she wore a bright blue blouse and
colorful red skirt. She was middle-aged, of lean build, and had her
waist-length hair pulled back in a braid. She waited patiently as
people moved about the room.
"What about
her?" Elend asked.
"Terris,"
Vin said.
Elend paused.
"You're sure?"
Vin nodded. "Those
colors . . . that much jewelry. She's a Terriswoman for sure."
"So?"
"So, I've
never met her," Vin said. "And she was watching you, just
now."
"People watch
me, Vin," Elend noted. "I am the king, after all.
Besides, why should you have met her?"
"All of the
other Terris people have come to meet me right after they enter the
city," Vin said. "I killed the Lord Ruler; they see me as
the one that freed their homeland. But, I don't recognize her. She
hasn't ever come thank me."
Elend rolled his
eyes, grabbing Vin by the shoulders and turning her away from the
woman. "Vin, I feel it's my gentlemanly duty to tell you
something."
Vin frowned.
"What?"
"You're
gorgeous."
Vin paused. "What
does that have to do with anything?"
"Absolutely
nothing," Elend said with a smile. "I'm just trying to
distract you."
Slowly, Vin
relaxed, smiling slightly.
"I don't know
if anyone's ever told you this, Vin," Elend noted, "but you
can be a bit paranoid at times."
She raised an
eyebrow. "Oh?"
"I know it's
hard to believe, but it's true. Now, I happen to find it rather
charming, but do you honestly think that a Terriswoman would
try to kill me?"
"Probably
not," Vin admitted. "But, old habits . . . "
Elend smiled. Then,
he glanced back at the Assemblymen, most of whom were speaking
quietly in groups. They didn't mix. Noblemen spoke with noblemen,
merchants with merchants, skaa workers with other skaa workers. They
seemed so fragmented, so obstinate. The simplest proposals sometimes
met with arguments that could take hours.
They need to
give me more time! he thought. Yet, even as he thought, he
realized the problem. More time for what? Penrod and Philen had
accurately attacked his proposal.
The truth was, the
entire city was in over its head. Nobody really knew what to do about
a superior invading force, least of all Elend. He just knew that they
couldn't give up. Not yet. There had to be a way to fight.
Vin was still
looking to the side, out over the audience. Elend followed her gaze.
"Still watching that Terriswoman?"
Vin shook her head.
"Something else . . . something odd. Is that one of Clubs's
messengers?"
Elend paused,
turning. Indeed, several soldiers were working their way through the
crowd, approaching the stage. At the back of the room, people had
begun whispering and shuffling, and some were already moving quickly
out of the chamber.
Elend felt Vin
stiffen in anxiety, and fear stabbed him. We're too late. The army
has attacked.
One of the soldiers
finally reached the stage, and Elend rushed over. "What?"
he asked. "Has Straff attacked?"
The soldier
frowned, looking concerned. "No, my lord."
Elend sighed
slightly. "What, then?"
"My lord, it's
a second army. It just arrived outside the city."
Oddly, it was
Alendi's simple ingenuousness that first led me to befriend him. I
employed him as an assistant during his first months in the grand
city.





11
FOR THE SECOND TIME
IN two days, Elend stood atop the Luthadel city wall, studying an
army that had come to invade his kingdom. Elend squinted against the
red afternoon sunlight, but he was no Tineye; he couldn't make out
details about the new arrival.
"Any chance
they're here to help us?" Elend asked hopefully, looking toward
Clubs, who stood beside him.
Clubs just scowled.
"They fly Cett's banner. Remember him? Guy who sent eight
Allomancer assassins to kill you two days back?"
Elend shivered in
the chill autumn weather, glancing back out over the second army. It
was making camp a good distance from Straff's army, close to the
Luth-Davn Canal, which ran out the west side of the River Channerel.
Vin stood at Elend's side, though Ham was off organizing things among
the city guard. OreSeur, wearing the wolfhound's body, sat patiently
on the wall walk beneath Vin.
"How did we
miss their approach?" Elend asked.
"Straff,"
Clubs said. "This Cett came in from the same direction, and our
scouts were focused on him. Straff probably knew about this other
army a few days ago, but we had virtually no chance of seeing them."
Elend nodded.
"Straff is
setting up a perimeter of soldiers, watching the enemy army,"
Vin said. "I doubt they're friendly to each other." She
stood atop one of the sawtooth parapet crenels, feet positioned
dangerously close to the wall's edge.
"Maybe they'll
attack each other," Elend said hopefully.
Clubs snorted. "I
doubt it. They're too evenly matched, though Straff might be a little
stronger. I doubt Cett would take the chance by attacking him."
"Why come,
then?" Elend asked.
Clubs shrugged.
"Maybe he hoped he'd beat Venture to Luthadel, and get to take
it first."
He spoke of the
event—the capture of Luthadel—as if it were a given.
Elend's stomach twisted as he leaned against the battlement, looking
out through a merlon. Vin and the others were thieves and skaa
Allomancers—outcasts who had been hunted for most of their
lives. Perhaps they were accustomed to dealing with this
pressure—this fear—but Elend was not.
How did they live
with the lack of control, the sense of inevitability? Elend felt
powerless. What could he do? Flee, and leave the city to fend for
itself? That, of course, was not an option. But, confronted with not
one, but two armies preparing to destroy his city and take his
throne, Elend found it hard to keep his hands steady as he gripped
the rough stone of the battlement.
Kelsier would
have found a way out of this, he thought.
"There!"
Vin's voice interrupted Elend's thoughts. "What's that?"
Elend turned. Vin
was squinting, looking toward Cett's army, using tin to see things
that were invisible to Elend's mundane eyes.
"Someone's
leaving the army," Vin said. "Riding on horseback."
"Messenger?"
Clubs asked.
"Maybe,"
Vin said. "He's riding pretty fast . . . ." She began to
run from one stone tooth to the next, moving along the wall. Her
kandra immediately followed, padding quietly across the wall beneath
her.
Elend glanced at
Clubs, who shrugged, and they began to follow. They caught up with
Vin standing on the wall near one of the towers, watching the
oncoming rider. Or, at least, Elend assumed that was what she
watched—he still couldn't see what she had.
Allomancy,
Elend thought, shaking his head. Why couldn't he have at least ended
up with one power—even one of the weaker ones, like copper or
iron?
Vin cursed
suddenly, standing up straight. "Elend, that's Breeze!"
"What!"
Elend said. "Are you sure?"
"Yes! He's
being chased. Archers on horseback."
Clubs cursed,
waving to a messenger. "Send riders! Cut off his pursuit!"
The messenger
dashed away. Vin, however, shook her head. "They won't make it
in time," she said, almost to herself. "The archers will
catch him, or at least shoot him. Even I couldn't get there fast
enough, not running. But, maybe . . . "
Elend frowned,
looking up at her. "Vin, that's way too far to jump—even
for you."
Vin glanced at him,
smiled, then leaped off the wall.
Vin readied the
fourteenth metal, duralumin. She had a reserve, but she didn't burn
it—not yet. I hope this works, she thought, seeking an
appropriate anchor. The tower beside her had a reinforced iron
bulwark on the top—that would work.
She Pulled on the
bulwark, yanking herself up to the top of the tower. She immediately
jumped again, Pushing herself up and out, angling into the air away
from the wall. She extinguished all of her metals except for steel
and pewter.
Then, still Pushing
against the bulwark, she burned duralumin.
A sudden force
smashed against her. It was so powerful, she was certain that only an
equally powerful flash of pewter held her body together. She blasted
away from the keep, hurtling through the sky as if tossed by some
giant, invisible god. The air rushed by so quickly that it roared,
and the pressure of sudden acceleration made it difficult to think.
She floundered,
trying to regain control. She had, fortunately, picked her trajectory
well: she was shooting right toward Breeze and his pursuers. Whatever
Breeze had done, it had been enough to make someone extremely
angry—for there were a full two dozen men charging after him,
arrows nocked.
Vin fell, her steel
and pewter completely burned away in that single duralumin-fueled
flash of power. She grabbed a metal vial off her belt, downing its
contents. However, as she tossed the vial away, she suddenly felt an
odd sense of vertigo. She wasn't accustomed to jumping during the
day. It was strange to see the ground coming at her, strange not to
have a mistcloak flapping behind her, strange not to have the mist .
. . .
The lead rider
lowered his bow, taking sight at Breeze. Neither appeared to have
noticed Vin, swooping down like a bird of prey above.
Well, not exactly
swooping. Plummeting.
Suddenly snapped
back to the moment, Vin burned pewter and threw a coin toward the
quickly approaching ground. She Pushed against the coin, using it to
slow her momentum and to nudge her to the side. She hit right between
Breeze and the archers, landing with a jarring crash, throwing up
dust and dirt.
The archer released
his arrow.
Even as Vin
rebounded, dirt spraying around her, she reached out and Pushed
herself back into the air straight at the arrow. Then she Pushed
against it. The arrowhead ripped backward—throwing out shards
of wood as it split its own shaft in midair—then smacked
directly into the forehead of the archer who had released it.
The man toppled
from his mount. Vin landed from her rebound. She reached out, Pushing
against the horseshoes of the two beasts behind the leader, causing
the animals to stumble. The Push threw Vin backward into the air, and
cries of equine pain sounded amid the crash of bodies hitting the
ground.
Vin continued to
Push, flying along the road just a few feet above the ground, quickly
catching up with Breeze. The portly man turned in shock, obviously
stunned to find Vin hanging in the air beside his galloping horse,
her clothing flapping in the wind of her passage. She winked at him,
then reached out and Pulled against the armor of another rider.
She immediately
lurched in the air. Her body protested the sudden shift in momentum,
but she ignored the twist of pain. The man she Pulled against managed
to stay in his saddle—until Vin smashed into him feet-first,
throwing him backward.
She landed on the
black earth, the rider tumbling to the ground beside her. A short
distance away, the remaining riders finally reined in their mounts,
coming to an abrupt stop a few feet away.
Kelsier probably
would have attacked. There were a lot of them, true, but they were
wearing armor and their horses were shod. Vin, however, was not
Kelsier. She had delayed the riders long enough for Breeze to get
away. That was enough.
Vin reached out and
Pushed against one of the soldiers, throwing herself backward,
leaving the riders to gather their wounded. The soldiers, however,
promptly pulled out stone-tipped arrows and nocked their bows.
Vin hissed in
frustration as the group took sight. Well, friends, she
thought, I suggest that you hang on tightly.
She Pushed slightly
against them all, then burned duralumin. The sudden crash of force
was expected—the wrench in her chest, the massive flare in her
stomach, the howling wind. What she didn't expect was the effect
she'd have on her anchors. The blast of power scattered men and
horses, throwing them into the air like leaves in the wind.
I'm going to
have to be very careful with this, Vin thought, gritting her
teeth and spinning herself in the air. Her steel and pewter were gone
again, and she was forced to down her last metal vial. She'd have to
start carrying more of those.
She hit the ground
running, pewter keeping her from tripping despite her terrific speed.
She slowed just slightly, letting the mounted Breeze catch up to her,
then increased her pace to keep up with him. She dashed like a
sprinter, letting pewter's strength and balance keep her upright as
she paced the tiring horse. The beast eyed her as they ran, seeming
to display a hint of animal frustration to see a human matching it.
They reached the
city a few moments later. Breeze reined in as the doors to Iron Gate
began to open, but, rather than wait, Vin simply threw down a coin
and Pushed, letting her forward momentum carry her toward the walls.
As the gates swung open, she Pushed against their studs, and this
second Push sent her sailing straight up. She just barely crested the
battlements—passing between a pair of startled soldiers—before
dropping over the other side. She landed in the courtyard, steadying
herself with one hand against the cool stones, as Breeze entered
through the gate.
Vin stood. Breeze
patted his forehead with a handkerchief as he trotted his animal up
beside her. He'd let his hair grow longer since she'd last seen him,
and he kept it slicked back, its lower edges tickling his collar. It
wasn't graying yet, though he was in his mid-forties. He wore no
hat—it had probably blown free—but he had on one of his
rich suits and silken vests. They were powdered with black ash from
his hurried ride.
"Ah, Vin, my
dear," Breeze said, breathing almost as deeply as his horse. "I
must say, that was a timely arrival on your part. Impressively
flamboyant as well. I do hate to force a rescue—but, well, if
one is necessary, then it might as well happen with style."
Vin smiled as he
climbed down from the horse—proving he was hardly the most
adroit man in the square—and stablehands arrived to care for
the beast. Breeze wiped his brow again as Elend, Clubs, and OreSeur
scrambled down the steps to the courtyard. One of the aides must have
finally found Ham, for he ran up through the courtyard.
"Breeze!"
Elend said, approaching and clasping arms with the shorter man.
"Your
Majesty," Breeze said. "You are in good health and good
humor, I assume?"
"Health, yes,"
Elend said. "Humor . . . well, there is an army crouching
just outside my city."
"Two armies,
actually," Clubs grumbled as he hobbled up.
Breeze folded up
his handkerchief. "Ah, and dear Master Cladent. Optimistic as
always, I see."
Clubs snorted. To
the side, OreSeur padded up to sit next to Vin.
"And Hammond,"
Breeze said, eyeing Ham, who was smiling broadly. "I'd almost
managed to delude myself into forgetting that you would be
here when I returned."
"Admit it,"
Ham said. "You're glad to see me."
"See you,
perhaps. Hear you, never. I had grown quite fond of my time
spent away from your perpetual, pseudo-philosophical pratterings."
Ham just smiled a
little broader.
"I'm glad to
see you, Breeze," Elend said. "But your timing could have
been a little better. I was hoping that you would be able to stop
some of these armies from marching on us."
"Stop
them?" Breeze asked. "Now, why would I want to do that, my
dear man? I did, after all, just spend three months working to get
Cett to march his army down here."
Elend paused, and
Vin frowned to herself, standing just outside the group. Breeze
looked rather pleased with himself—though that was, admittedly,
rather common for him.
"So . . . Lord
Cett's on our side?" Elend asked hopefully.
"Of course
not," Breeze said. "He's here to ravage the city and steal
your presumed atium supply."
"You,"
Vin said. "You're the one who has been spreading the rumors
about the Lord Ruler's atium stash, aren't you?"
"Of course,"
Breeze said, eyeing Spook as the boy finally arrived at the gates.
Elend frowned. "But
. . . why?"
"Look outside
your walls, my dear man," Breeze said. "I knew that your
father was going to march on Luthadel eventually—even my
powers of persuasion wouldn't have been enough to dissuade him. So, I
began spreading rumors in the Western Dominance, then made myself one
of Lord Cett's advisors."
Clubs grunted.
"Good plan. Crazy, but good."
"Crazy?"
Breeze said. "My mental stability is no issue here,
Clubs. The move was not crazy, but brilliant."
Elend looked
confused. "Not to insult your brilliance, Breeze. But . . . how
exactly is bringing a hostile army to our city a good idea?"
"It's basic
negotiating strategy, my good man," Breeze explained as a
packman handed him his dueling cane, taken off the horse. Breeze used
it to gesture westward, toward Lord Cett's army. "When there are
only two participants in a negotiation, one is generally stronger
than the other. That makes things very difficult for the weaker
party—which, in this case, would have been us."
"Yes,"
Elend said, "but with three armies, we're still the weakest."
"Ah,"
Breeze said, holding up the cane, "but those other two parties
are fairly even in strength. Straff is likely stronger, but Cett has
a very large force. If either of those warlords risks attacking
Luthadel, his army will suffer losses—enough losses that he
won't be able to defend himself from the third army. To attack us is
to expose oneself."
"And that
makes this a standoff," Clubs said.
"Exactly,"
Breeze said. "Trust me, Elend my boy. In this case, two large,
enemy armies are far better than a single large, enemy army. In a
three-way negotiation, the weakest party actually has the most
power—because his allegiance added to either of the other two
will choose the eventual winner."
Elend frowned.
"Breeze, we don't want to give our allegiance to either
of these men."
"I realize
that," Breeze said. "However, our opponents do not. By
bringing a second army in, I've given us time to think. Both warlords
thought they could get here first. Now that they've arrived at the
same time, they'll have to reevaluate. I'm guessing we'll end up in
an extended siege. A couple of months at least."
"That doesn't
explain how we're going to get rid of them," Elend said.
Breeze shrugged. "I
got them here—you get to decide what to do with them. And I'll
tell you, it was no easy task to make Cett arrive on time. He was due
to come in a full five days before Venture. Fortunately, a certain .
. . malady spread through camp a few days ago. Apparently, someone
poisoned the main water supply and gave the entire camp diarrhea."
Spook, standing
behind Clubs, snickered.
"Yes,"
Breeze said, eyeing the boy. "I thought you might appreciate
that. You still an unintelligible nuisance, boy?"
"Wassing the
where of not," Spook said, smiling and slipping back into his
Eastern street slang.
Breeze snorted.
"You still make more sense than Hammond, half the time," he
mumbled, turning to Elend. "So, isn't anyone going to send for a
carriage to drive me back to the palace? I've been Soothing you
ungrateful lot for the better part of five minutes—looking as
tired and pathetic as I can—and not one of you has had the good
graces to pity me!"
"You must be
losing your touch," Vin said with a smile. Breeze was a
Soother—an Allomancer who could burn brass to calm another
person's emotions. A very skilled Soother—and Vin knew of none
more skilled than Breeze—could dampen all of a person's
emotions but a single one, effectively making them feel exactly as he
wanted.
"Actually,"
Elend said, turning and looking back up at the wall, "I was
hoping we could go back up on the wall and study the armies some
more. If you spent time with Lord Cett's force, then you could
probably tell us a lot about it."
"I can; I
will; I am not going to climb those steps. Can't you see how
tired I am, man?"
Ham snorted,
clapping Breeze on the shoulder—and throwing up a puff of dust.
"How can you be tired? Your poor horse did all the running."
"It was
emotionally exhausting, Hammond," Breeze said, rapping the
larger man's hand with his cane. "My departure was somewhat
disagreeable."
"What
happened, anyway?" Vin asked. "Did Cett find out you were a
spy?"
Breeze looked
embarrassed. "Let's just say that Lord Cett and I had a . . .
falling-out."
"Caught you in
bed with his daughter, eh?" Ham said, earning a chuckle from the
group. Breeze was anything but a ladies' man. Despite his ability to
play with emotions, he had expressed no interest in romance for as
long as Vin had known him. Dockson had once noted that Breeze was
just too focused on himself to consider such things.
Breeze simply
rolled his eyes at Ham's comment. "Honestly, Hammond. I think
your jokes are getting worse as you age. One too many hits on the
head while sparring, I suspect."
Ham smiled, and
Elend sent for a couple of carriages. While they waited, Breeze
launched into a narrative of his travels. Vin glanced down at
OreSeur. She still hadn't found a good opportunity to tell the rest
of the crew about the body change. Perhaps now that Breeze was back,
Elend would hold a conference with his inner circle. That would be a
good time. She had to be quiet about it, since she wanted the palace
staff to think that she'd sent OreSeur away.
Breeze continued
his story, and Vin looked back at him, smiling. Not only was Breeze a
natural orator, but he had a very subtle touch with Allomancy. She
could barely feel his fingers on her emotions. Once, she had found
his intrusions offensive, but she was growing to understand that
touching people's emotions was simply part of who Breeze was. Just as
a beautiful woman demanded attention by virtue of her face and
figure, Breeze drew it by near unconscious use of his powers.
Of course, that
didn't make him any less a scoundrel. Getting others to do as he
wished was one of Breeze's main occupations. Vin just no longer
resented him for using Allomancy to do it.
The carriage
finally approached, and Breeze sighed in relief. As the vehicle
pulled up, he eyed Vin, then nodded toward OreSeur. "What's
that?"
"A dog,"
Vin said.
"Ah, blunt as
ever, I see," Breeze said. "And, why is it that you now
have a dog?"
"I gave it to
her," Elend said. "She wanted one, so I bought it for her."
"And you chose
a wolfhound?" Ham asked, amused.
"You've fought
with her before, Ham," Elend said, laughing. "What would
you have given her? A poodle?"
Ham chuckled. "No,
I guess not. It fits, actually."
"Though it's
almost as big as she is," Clubs added, regarding her with a
squinty-eyed look.
Vin reached down,
resting her hand on OreSeur's head. Clubs did have a point; she'd
chosen a big animal, even for a wolfhound. He stood over three feet
tall at the shoulder—and Vin knew from experience how heavy
that body was.
"Remarkably
well-behaved for a wolfhound," Ham said, nodding. "You
chose well, El."
"Regardless,"
Breeze said. "Can we please return to the palace? Armies and
wolfhounds are all well and good, but I believe supper is more
pressing at this point."
"So, why
didn't we tell them about OreSeur?" Elend asked, as their
carriage bumped its way back toward Keep Venture. The three of them
had taken a carriage of their own, leaving the other four to follow
in the other vehicle.
Vin shrugged.
OreSeur sat on the seat across from her and Elend, quietly watching
the conversation. "I'll tell them eventually," Vin said. "A
busy city square didn't seem the right place for the revelation."
Elend smiled.
"Keeping secrets is a hard habit to break, eh?"
Vin flushed. "I'm
not keeping him secret, I'm just . . . " She trailed off,
looking down.
"Don't feel
bad, Vin," Elend said. "You lived a long time on your own,
without anyone to trust. Nobody expects you to change overnight."
"It hasn't
been one night, Elend," she said. "It's been two years."
Elend laid a hand
on her knee. "You're getting better. The others talk about how
much you've changed."
Vin nodded. Another
man would be afraid that I'm keeping secrets from him, too. Elend
just tries to make me feel less guilty. He was a better man than
she deserved.
"Kandra,"
Elend said, "Vin says you do well at keeping up with her."
"Yes, Your
Majesty," OreSeur said. "These bones, though distasteful,
are well equipped for tracking and quick movement."
"And if she
gets hurt?" Elend said. "Will you be able to pull her to
safety?"
"Not with any
speed, Your Majesty. I will, however, be able to go for aid. These
bones have many limitations, but I will do my best to fulfill the
Contract."
Elend must have
caught Vin's raised eyebrow, for he chuckled. "He'll do as he
says, Vin."
"The Contract
is everything, Mistress," OreSeur said. "It demands more
than simple service. It requires diligence and devotion. It is
the kandra. By serving it, we serve our people."
Vin shrugged. The
group fell silent, Elend pulling a book from his pocket, Vin leaning
against him. OreSeur lay down, filling the entire seat opposite the
humans. Eventually, the carriage rolled into the Venture courtyard,
and Vin found herself looking forward to a warm bath. As they were
climbing from the carriage, however, a guard rushed up to Elend. Tin
allowed Vin to hear what the man said, even though he spoke before
she could close the distance.
"Your
Majesty," the guard whispered, "our messenger reached you,
then?"
"No,"
Elend said with a frown as Vin walked over. The soldier gave her a
look, but continued speaking; the soldiers all knew that Vin was
Elend's primary bodyguard and confidant. Still, the man looked oddly
concerned when he saw her.
"We . . . ah,
don't want to be intrusive," the soldier said. "That's why
we've kept this quiet. We were just wondering if . . . everything is
all right." He looked at Vin as he spoke.
"What is this
about?" Elend asked.
The guard turned
back toward the king. "The corpse in Lady Vin's room."
The "corpse"
was actually a skeleton. One completely picked clean, without a hint
of blood—or even tissue—marring its shiny white surfaces.
A good number of the bones were broken, however.
"I'm sorry,
Mistress," OreSeur said, speaking low enough that only she could
hear. "I assumed that you were going to dispose of these."
Vin nodded. The
skeleton was, of course, the one OreSeur had been using before she
gave him the animal body. Finding the door unlocked—Vin's usual
sign that she wanted a room cleaned—the maids had entered. Vin
had stashed the bones in a basket, intending to deal with them later.
Apparently, the maids had decided to check and see what was in the
basket, and been somewhat surprised.
"It's all
right, Captain," Elend said to the young guard—Captain
Demoux, second-in-command of the palace guard. Despite the fact that
Ham shunned uniforms, this man seemed to take great pride in keeping
his own uniform very neat and smart.
"You did well
by keeping this quiet," Elend said. "We knew about these
bones already. They aren't a reason for concern."
Demoux nodded. "We
figured it was something intentional." He didn't look at Vin as
he spoke.
Intentional,
Vin thought. Great. I wonder what this man thinks I did. Few
skaa knew what kandra were, and Demoux wouldn't know what to make of
remains like these.
"Could you
dispose of these quietly for me, Captain?" Elend asked, nodding
to the bones.
"Of course,
Your Majesty," the guard said.
He probably
assumes I ate the person or something, Vin thought with a sigh.
Sucked the flesh right off his bones.
Which, actually,
wasn't that far from the truth.
"Your
Majesty," Demoux said. "Would you like us to dispose of the
other body as well?"
Vin froze.
"Other one?"
Elend asked slowly.
The guard nodded.
"When we found this skeleton, we brought in some dogs to sniff
about. The dogs didn't turn up any killers, but they did find another
body. Just like this one—a set of bones, completely cleaned of
flesh."
Vin and Elend
shared a look. "Show us," Elend said.
Demoux nodded, and
led them out of the room, giving a few whispered orders to one of his
men. The four of them—three humans and one kandra—traveled
a short distance down the palace hallway, toward a less used section
of visitors' chambers. Demoux dismissed a soldier standing at a
particular door, then led them inside.
"This body
wasn't in a basket, Your Majesty," Demoux said. "It was
stuffed in a back closet. We'd probably never have found it without
the dogs—they picked up the scent pretty easily, though I can't
see how. These corpses are completely clean of flesh."
And there it was.
Another skeleton, like the first, sitting piled beside a bureau.
Elend glanced at Vin, then turned to Demoux. "Would you excuse
us, Captain?"
The young guard
nodded, walking from the room and closing the door.
"Well?"
Elend said, turning to OreSeur.
"I do not know
where this came from," the kandra said.
"But it is
another kandra-eaten corpse," Vin said.
"Undoubtedly,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "The dogs found it because of the
particular scent our digestive juices leave on recently excreted
bones."
Elend and Vin
shared a look.
"However,"
OreSeur said, "it is probably not what you think. This man was
probably killed far from here."
"What do you
mean?"
"They are
discarded bones, Your Majesty," OreSeur said. "The bones a
kandra leaves behind . . . "
"After he
finds a new body," Vin finished.
"Yes,
Mistress," OreSeur said.
Vin looked at
Elend, who frowned. "How long ago?" he asked. "Maybe
the bones were left a year before, by my father's kandra."
"Perhaps, Your
Majesty," OreSeur said. But he sounded hesitant. He padded over,
sniffing at the bones. Vin picked one up herself, holding it to her
nose. With tin, she easily picked out a sharp scent that reminded her
of bile.
"It's very
strong," she said, glancing at OreSeur.
He nodded. "These
bones haven't been here long, Your Majesty. A few hours at most.
Perhaps even less."
"Which means
we have another kandra somewhere in the palace," Elend said,
looking a bit sick. "One of my staff has been . . . eaten and
replaced."
"Yes, Your
Majesty," OreSeur said. "There is no way to tell from these
bones whom it could be, since these are the discards. The kandra
would have taken the new bones, eating their flesh and wearing their
clothing."
Elend nodded,
standing. He met Vin's eyes, and she knew he was thinking the same
thing she was. It was possible that a member of the palace staff had
been replaced, which would mean a slight breach in security. There
was a far more dangerous possibility, however.
Kandra were
incomparable actors; OreSeur had imitated Lord Renoux so perfectly
that even people who'd known him had been fooled. Such talent could
have been used for the imitation of a maid or a servant. However, if
an enemy had wanted to get a spy into Elend's closed meetings, he
would need to replace a person far more important.
It would be
someone that we haven't seen during the last few hours, Vin
thought, dropping the bone. She, Elend, and OreSeur had been on the
wall for most of the afternoon and evening—ever since the end
of the Assembly meeting—but the city and palace had been in
chaos since the second army had arrived. The messengers had had
trouble finding Ham, and she still wasn't certain where Dockson was.
In fact, she hadn't seen Clubs until he'd joined her and Elend on the
wall just a bit before. And Spook had been the last to arrive.
Vin looked down at
the pile of bones, feeling a sickening sense of unease. There was a
very good chance that someone in their core team—a member of
Kelsier's former band—was now an impostor.





PART TWO
GHOSTS IN THE MIST
It wasn't until
years later that I became convinced that Alendi was the Hero of Ages.
Hero of Ages: the one called Rabzeen in Khlennium, the Anamnesor.
Savior.





12
A FORTRESS SAT IN
THE misty murk of evening.
It rested at the
bottom of a large depression in the land. The steep-sided, craterlike
valley was so wide that even in daylight Sazed would barely have been
able to see the other side. In the oncoming darkness, obscured by
mist, the far edge of the massive hole was only a deep shadow.
Sazed knew very
little about tactics and strategy; though his metalminds held dozens
of books on the subjects, he had forgotten their contents in order to
create the stored records. The little he did know told him that this
fortress—the Conventical of Seran—was not very
defensible. It relinquished the high ground, and the crater sides
would provide an excellent location for siege engines to pelt rocks
down at the walls.
This fortress,
however, had not been built to defend against enemy soldiers. It had
been built to provide solitude. The crater made it difficult to find,
for a slight rise in the land around the crater's lip made it
practically invisible until one drew near. No roads or paths marked
the way, and travelers would have great trouble getting down the
sheer sides.
The Inquisitors did
not want visitors.
"Well?"
Marsh asked.
He and Sazed stood
on the crater's northern lip, before a drop of several hundred feet.
Sazed tapped his vision tinmind, drawing forth some of the eyesight
he had stored within it. The edges of his vision fuzzed, but things
directly in front of him seemed to grow much closer. He tapped a
little more sight, ignoring the nausea that came from compounding so
much vision.
The increased
eyesight let him study the Conventical as if he stood before it. He
could see each notch in the dark stone walls—flat, broad,
imposing. He could discern each bit of rust on the large steel plates
that hung bolted into outside stones of the wall. He could see each
lichen-encrusted corner and ash-stained ledge. There were no windows.
"I do not
know," Sazed said slowly, releasing his vision tinmind. "It
is not easy to say whether or not the fortress is inhabited. There is
no motion, nor is there light. But, perhaps the Inquisitors are just
hiding inside."
"No,"
Marsh said, his stiff voice uncomfortably loud in the evening air.
"They are gone."
"Why would
they leave? This is a place of great strength, I think. Poor defense
against an army, but a great defense against the chaos of the times."
Marsh shook his
head. "They are gone."
"How are you
so certain?"
"I do not
know."
"Where did
they go, then?"
Marsh looked at
him, then turned and glanced over his shoulder. "North."
"Toward
Luthadel?" Sazed asked, frowning.
"Among other
things," Marsh said. "Come. I do not know if they will
return, but we should exploit this opportunity."
Sazed nodded. This
was why they had come, after all. Still, a part of him hesitated. He
was a man of books and genteel service. Traveling the countryside to
visit villages was enough removed from his experience to be
discomforting. Infiltrating the Inquisitor stronghold . . .
Marsh obviously
didn't care about his companion's inner struggles. The Inquisitor
turned and began to walk along the rim of the crater. Sazed threw his
pack over his shoulder, then followed. They eventually arrived at a
cage-like contraption, obviously meant to be lowered down to the
bottom by ropes and pulleys. The cage sat locked in place at the top
ledge, and Marsh stopped at its side, but did not enter.
"What?"
Sazed asked.
"The pulley
system," Marsh said. "The cage is meant to be lowered by
men holding it from below."
Sazed nodded,
realizing this was true. Marsh stepped forward and threw a lever. The
cage fell. Ropes began to smoke, and pulleys squealed as the massive
cage plummeted toward the chasm floor. A muted crash echoed against
the rocks.
If there is
anyone down there, Sazed thought, they now know we're here.
Marsh turned toward
him, the heads of his eye-spikes glistening slightly in the failing
sunlight. "Follow however you wish," he said. Then, he tied
off the counterrope and began to climb down the ropes.
Sazed stepped up to
the platform's edge, watching Marsh shimmy down the dangling rope
into the shadowed, misty abyss. Then, Sazed knelt and opened his
pack. He unhooked the large metal bracers around his upper and lower
arms—his core copperminds. They contained the memories of a
Keeper, the stored knowledge of centuries past. He reverently placed
them to the side, then pulled a pair of much smaller bracelets—one
iron, one pewter—from the pack. Metalminds for a warrior.
Did Marsh
understand how unskilled Sazed was in this area? Amazing strength did
not a warrior make. Regardless, Sazed snapped the two bracelets
around his ankles. Next, he pulled out two rings—tin and
copper. These he slipped on his fingers.
He closed the pack
and threw it over his shoulder, then picked up his core copperminds.
He carefully located a good hiding place—a secluded hollow
between two boulders—and slid them inside. Whatever happened
below, he didn't want to risk them being taken and destroyed by the
Inquisitors.
In order to fill a
coppermind with memories, Sazed had listened to another Keeper recite
his entire collection of histories, facts, and stories. Sazed had
memorized each sentence, then shoved those memories into the
coppermind for later retrieval. Sazed remembered very little of the
actual experience—but he could draw forth any of the books or
essays he wished, placing them back into his mind, gaining the
ability to recollect them as crisply as when he'd first memorized
them. He just had to have the bracers on.
Being without his
copperminds made him anxious. He shook his head, walking back over to
the platform. Marsh was moving very quickly down toward the chasm
floor; like all Inquisitors, he had the powers of a Mistborn. Though
how he had gotten those powers—and how he managed to live
despite the spikes that had been driven directly through his
brain—was a mystery. Marsh had never answered Sazed's questions
on the subject.
Sazed called down,
drawing Marsh's attention, then held up his pack and dropped it.
Marsh reached out, and the pack lurched, Pulled by its metals into
Marsh's hand. The Inquisitor threw it over his shoulder before
continuing his descent.
Sazed nodded
thankfully, then stepped off the platform. As he began to fall, he
mentally reached into his ironmind, searching for the power he had
stored therein. Filling a metalmind always had a cost: in order to
store up sight, Sazed had been forced to spend weeks with poor
eyesight. During that time, he had worn a tin bracelet, stowing away
the excess sight for later use.
Iron was a bit
different from the others. It didn't store up sight, strength,
endurance—or even memories. It stored something completely
different: weight.
This day, Sazed
didn't tap the power stored inside the ironmind; that would have made
him more heavy. Instead, he began to fill the ironmind, letting it
suck away his weight. He felt a familiar sense of lightness—a
sense that his own body wasn't pressing upon itself as forcefully.
His fall slowed.
The Terris philosophers had much to say on using an ironmind. They
explained that the power didn't actually change a person's bulk or
size—it just somehow changed the way that the ground pulled
against them. Sazed's fall didn't slow because of his decrease in
weight—it slowed because he suddenly had a relatively large
amount of surface exposed to the wind of his fall, and a lighter body
to go along with it.
Regardless of the
scientific reasons, Sazed didn't fall as quickly. The thin metal
bracelets on his legs were the heaviest things on his body, and they
kept him pointed feet-downward. He held out his arms and bent his
body slightly, letting the wind push against him. His descent was not
terribly slow—not like that of a leaf or a feather. However, he
didn't plummet either. Instead, he fell in a controlled—almost
leisurely—manner. Clothing flapping, arms outspread, he passed
Marsh, who watched with a curious expression.
As he approached
the ground, Sazed tapped his pewtermind, drawing forth a tiny bit of
strength to prepare. He hit the ground—but, because his body
was so light, there was very little shock. He barely even needed to
bend his knees to absorb the force of impact.
He stopped filling
the ironmind, released his pewter, and waited quietly for Marsh.
Beside him, the carrying cage lay in shambles. Sazed noticed several
broken iron shackles with discomfort. Apparently, some of those who
had visited the Conventical had not come by choice.
By the time Marsh
neared the bottom, the mists were thick in the air. Sazed had lived
with them all of his life, and had never before felt uncomfortable in
them. Yet, now he half expected the mists to begin choking him. To
kill him, as they seemed to have done to old Jed, the unfortunate
farmer whose death Sazed had investigated.
Marsh dropped the
last ten feet or so, landing with an Allomancer's increased agility.
Even after spending so much time with Mistborn, Sazed was impressed
with Allomancy's gifts. Of course, he'd never been jealous of
them—not really. True, Allomancy was better in a fight; but it
could not expand the mind, giving one access to the dreams, hopes,
and beliefs of a thousand years of culture. It could not give the
knowledge to treat a wound, or help teach a poor village to use
modern fertilization techniques. The metalminds of Feruchemy weren't
flamboyant, but they had a far more lasting value to society.
Besides, Sazed knew
a few tricks with Feruchemy that were bound to surprise even the most
prepared warrior.
Marsh handed him
the pack. "Come."
Sazed nodded,
shouldering the pack and following the Inquisitor across the rocky
ground. Walking next to Marsh was odd, for Sazed wasn't accustomed to
being around people who were as tall as he was. Terrismen were tall
by nature, and Sazed even more so: his arms and legs were a bit too
long for his body, a medical condition brought on by his having been
castrated as a very young boy. Though the Lord Ruler was dead, Terris
culture would long feel the effects of his stewardship and breeding
programs—the methods by which he had tried to breed
Feruchemical powers out of the Terris people.
The Conventical of
Seran loomed in the darkness, looking even more ominous now that
Sazed stood within the crater. Marsh strode right up to the front
doors, and Sazed followed behind. He wasn't afraid, not really. Fear
had never been a strong motivator in Sazed's life. However, he did
worry. There were so few Keepers left; if he died, that was one fewer
person who could travel, restoring lost truths and teaching the
people.
Not that I'm
doing such at the moment anyway . . . .
Marsh regarded the
massive steel doors. Then he threw his weight against one, obviously
burning pewter to enhance his strength. Sazed joined him, pushing
hard. The door did not budge.
Regretting the
expenditure of power, Sazed reached into his pewtermind and tapped
strength. He used far more than he had when landing, and his muscles
immediately increased in size. Unlike Allomancy, Feruchemy often had
direct effects on a person's body. Beneath his robes, Sazed gained
the bulk and build of a lifetime warrior, easily becoming twice as
strong as he had been a moment earlier. With their combined effort,
the two of them managed to push the door open.
It did not creak.
It slid slowly, but evenly, inward, exposing a long, dark hallway.
Sazed released his
pewtermind, reverting to his normal self. Marsh strode into the
Conventical, his feet kicking up the mist that had begun to pour
through the open doorway.
"Marsh?"
Sazed asked.
The Inquisitor
turned.
"I won't be
able to see inside there."
"Your
Feruchemy . . . "
Sazed shook his
head. "It can let me see better in darkness, but only if there's
some light to begin with. In addition, tapping that much sight would
drain my tinmind in a matter of minutes. I'll need a lantern."
Marsh paused, then
nodded. He turned into the darkness, quickly disappearing from
Sazed's view.
So, Sazed
thought, Inquisitors don't need light to see. It was to be
expected: the spikes filled Marsh's entire sockets, completely
destroying the eyeballs. Whatever strange power allowed Inquisitors
to see, it apparently worked just as well in pure darkness as it did
in daylight.
Marsh returned a
few moments later, carrying a lamp. From the chains Sazed had seen on
the descent cage, Sazed suspected that the Inquisitors had kept a
sizable group of slaves and servants to attend their needs. If that
was the case, where had the people gone? Had they fled?
Sazed lit the lamp
with a flint from his pack. The lamp's ghostly light illuminated a
stark, daunting hallway. He stepped into the Conventical, holding the
lamp high, and began to fill the small copper ring on his finger, the
process transforming it into a coppermind.
"Large rooms,"
he whispered, "without adornment." He didn't really need to
say the words, but he'd found that speaking helped him form distinct
memories. He could then place them into the coppermind.
"The
Inquisitors, obviously, had a fondness for steel," he continued.
"This is not surprising, considering that their religion was
often referred to as the Steel Ministry. The walls are hung with
massive steel plates, which bear no rust, unlike the ones outside.
Many of those here are not completely smooth, but instead crafted
with some interesting patterns etched . . . almost buffed . .
. into their surfaces."
Marsh frowned,
turning toward him. "What are you doing?"
Sazed held up his
right hand, showing the copper ring. "I must make an account of
this visit. I will need to repeat this experience back to other
Keepers when the opportunity presents itself. There is much to be
learned from this place, I think."
Marsh turned away.
"You should not care about the Inquisitors. They are not worthy
of your record."
"It isn't a
matter of worthiness, Marsh," Sazed said, holding up his lamp to
study a square pillar. "Knowledge of all religions is valuable.
I must make certain these things persist."
Sazed regarded the
pillar for a moment, then closed his eyes and formed an image of it
inside his head, which he then added to the coppermind. Visual
memories, however, were less useful than spoken words. Visualizations
faded very quickly once taken out of a coppermind, suffering from the
mind's distortion. Plus, they could not be passed to other Keepers.
Marsh didn't
respond to Sazed's comment about religion; he just turned and walked
deeper into the building. Sazed followed at a slower pace, speaking
to himself, recording the words in his coppermind. It was an
interesting experience. As soon as he spoke, he felt the thoughts
sucked from his mind, leaving behind a blank hollowness. He had
difficulty remembering the specifics of what he had just been saying.
However, once he was done filling his coppermind, he would be able to
tap those memories later and know them with crisp clarity.
"The room is
tall," he said. "There are a few pillars, and they are also
wrapped in steel. They are blocky and square, rather than round. I
get a sense that this place was created by a people who cared little
for subtlety. They ignored small details in favor of broad lines and
full geometries.
"As we move
beyond the main entryway, this architectural theme continues. There
are no paintings on the walls, nor are there wooden adornments or
tile floors. Instead, there are only the long, broad hallways with
their harsh lines and reflective surfaces. The floor is constructed
of steel squares, each a few feet across. They are . . . cold to the
touch.
"It is strange
not to see the tapestries, stained-glass windows, and sculpted stones
that are so common in Luthadel's architecture. There are no spires or
vaultings here. Just squares and rectangles. Lines . . . so many
lines. Nothing here is soft. No carpet, no rugs, no windows. It is a
place for people who see the world differently from ordinary men.
"Marsh walked
straight down this massive hallway, as if oblivious to its decor. I
will follow him, then come back to record more later. He seems to be
following something . . . something I cannot sense. Perhaps it is . .
. "
Sazed trailed off
as he stepped around a bend and saw Marsh standing in the doorway of
a large chamber. The lamplight flickered unevenly as Sazed's arm
quivered.
Marsh had found the
servants.
They had been dead
long enough that Sazed hadn't noticed the scent until he had come
close. Perhaps that was what Marsh had been following; the senses of
a man burning tin could be quite acute.
The Inquisitors had
done their work thoroughly. These were the remnants of a slaughter.
The room was large, but had only one exit, and the bodies were piled
high near the back, killed by what looked like harsh sword or axe
strokes. The servants had huddled up against the back wall as they
died.
Sazed turned away.
Marsh, however,
remained in the doorway. "There is a bad air about this place,"
he finally said.
"You have only
just noticed that?" Sazed asked.
Marsh turned,
glancing at him, demanding his gaze. "We should not spend much
time here. There are stairs at the end of the hallway behind us. I
will go up—that is where the Inquisitors' quarters will be. If
the information I seek is here, I will find it there. You may stay,
or you may descend. However, do not follow me."
Sazed frowned.
"Why?"
"I must be
alone here. I cannot explain it. I do not care if you witness
Inquisitor atrocities. I just . . . do not wish to be with you when
you do."
Sazed lowered his
lamp, turning its light away from the horrific scene. "Very
well."
Marsh turned,
brushing past Sazed and disappearing into the dark hallway. And Sazed
was alone.
He tried not to
think about that very much. He returned to the main hallway,
describing the slaughter to his coppermind before giving a more
detailed explanation of the architecture and the art—if,
indeed, that was what the different patterns on the wall plates could
be called.
As he worked—his
voice echoing quietly against the rigid architecture, his lamp a weak
drop of light reflected in steel—his eyes were drawn toward the
back of the hallway. There was a pool of darkness there. A stairwell,
leading down.
Even as he turned
back to his description of one of the wall mounts, he knew that he
would eventually find himself walking toward that darkness. It was
the same as ever—the curiosity, the need to understand
the unknown. This sense had driven him as a Keeper, had led him to
Kelsier's company. His search for truths could never be completed,
but neither could it be ignored. So, he eventually turned and
approached the stairwell, his own whispering voice his only
companion.
"The stairs
are akin to what I saw in the hallway. They are broad and expansive,
like the steps leading up to a temple or palace. Except, these go
down, into darkness. They are large, likely cut from stone and then
lined with steel. They are tall, meant for a determined stride.
"As I walk, I
wonder what secrets the Inquisitors deemed worthy of hiding below the
earth, in the basement of their stronghold. This entire building is a
secret. What did they do here, in these massive hallways and open,
empty rooms?
"The stairwell
ends in another large, square room. I've noticed something—there
are no doors in the doorways here. Each room is open, visible to
those outside. As I walk, peeking into the rooms beneath the earth, I
find cavernous chambers with few furnishings. No libraries, no
lounges. Several contain large metal blocks that could be altars.
"There is . .
. something different here in this last room, at the back of the main
landing. I'm not certain what to make of it. A torture chamber,
perhaps? There are tables—metal tables—set into the
floor. They are bloody, though there are no corpses. Blood flakes and
powders at my feet—a lot of men have died in this room, I
think. There don't appear to be torture implements beyond . . .
"Spikes. Like
the ones in Inquisitor eyes. Massive, heavy things—like the
spikes one might pound into the ground with a very large mallet. Some
are tipped with blood, though I don't think I'll handle those. These
other ones . . . yes, they look indistinguishable from the ones in
Marsh's eyes. Yet, some are of different metals."
Sazed set the spike
down on a table, metal clinking against metal. He shivered, scanning
the room again. A place to make new Inquisitors, perhaps? He had a
sudden horrific vision of the creatures—once only several dozen
in number—having swelled their ranks during their months
sequestered in the Conventical.
But that didn't
seem right. They were a secretive, exclusive bunch. Where would they
have found enough men worthy of joining their ranks? Why not make
Inquisitors from the servants above, rather than just killing them?
Sazed had always
suspected that a man had to be an Allomancer to be changed into an
Inquisitor. Marsh's own experience substantiated that premise: Marsh
had been a Seeker, a man who could burn bronze, before his
transformation. Sazed looked again at the blood, the spikes, and the
tables, and decided he wasn't certain that he wanted to know how one
made a new Inquisitor.
Sazed was about to
leave the room when his lamp revealed something at the back. Another
doorway.
He moved forward,
trying to ignore the dried blood at his feet, and entered a chamber
that didn't seem to match the rest of the Conventical's daunting
architecture. It was cut directly into the stone, and it twisted down
into a very small stairwell. Curious, Sazed walked down the set of
worn stone steps. For the first time since entering the building, he
felt cramped, and he had to stoop as he reached the bottom of the
stairwell and entered a small chamber. He stood up straight, and held
up his lamp to reveal . . .
A wall. The room
ended abruptly, and his light sparkled off the wall. It held a steel
plate, like those above. This one was a good five feet across, and
nearly as tall. And it bore writing. Suddenly interested, Sazed set
down his pack and stepped forward, raising his lamp to read the top
words on the wall.
The text was in
Terris.
It was an old
dialect, certainly, but one that Sazed could make out even without
his language coppermind. His hand trembled as he read the words.
I
write these words in steel, for anything not set in metal cannot be
trusted.
I
have begun to wonder if I am the only sane man remaining. Can the
others not see? They have been waiting so long for their hero to
come—the one spoken of in Terris prophecies—that they
quickly jump between conclusions, presuming that each story and
legend applies to this one man.
My
brethren ignore the other facts. They cannot connect the other
strange things that are happening. They are deaf to my objections and
blind to my discoveries.
Perhaps
they are right. Perhaps I am mad, or jealous, or simply daft. My name
is Kwaan. Philosopher, scholar, traitor. I am the one who discovered
Alendi, and I am the one who first proclaimed him to be the Hero of
Ages. I am the one who started this all.
And
I am the one who betrayed him, for I now know that he must never be
allowed to complete his quest.
"Sazed."
Sazed jumped,
nearly dropping the lamp. Marsh stood in the doorway behind him.
Imperious, discomforting, and so dark. He fit this place, with its
lines and hardness.
"The upstairs
quarters are empty," Marsh said. "This trip has been a
waste—my brethren took anything of use with them."
"Not a waste,
Marsh," Sazed said, turning back to the plate of text. He hadn't
read all of it; he hadn't even gotten close. The script was written
in a tight, cramped hand, its etchings coating the wall. The steel
had preserved the words despite their obvious age. Sazed's heart beat
a little faster.
This was a fragment
of text from before the Lord Ruler's reign. A fragment written by a
Terris philosopher—a holy man. Despite ten centuries of
searching, the Keepers had never fulfilled the original goal of their
creation: they had never discovered their own Terris religion.
The Lord Ruler had
squelched Terris religious teachings soon after his rise to power.
His persecution of the Terris people—his own people—had
been the most complete of his long reign, and the Keepers had never
found more than vague fragments regarding what their own people had
once believed.
"I have to
copy this down, Marsh," Sazed said, reaching for his pack.
Taking a visual memory wouldn't work—no man could stare at a
wall of so much text, then remember the words. He could, perhaps,
read them into his coppermind. However, he wanted a physical record,
one that perfectly preserved the structure of lines and punctuation.
Marsh shook his
head. "We will not stay here. I do not think we should even have
come."
Sazed paused,
looking up. Then he pulled several large sheets of paper from his
pack. "Very well, then," he said. "I'll take a
rubbing. That will be better anyway, I think. It will let me see the
text exactly as it was written."
Marsh nodded, and
Sazed got out his charcoal.
This discovery
. . . he thought with excitement. This will be like Rashek's
logbook. We are getting close!
However, even as he
began the rubbing—his hands moving carefully and
precisely—another thought occurred to him. With a text like
this in his possession, his sense of duty would no longer let him
wander the villages. He had to return to the north to share what he
had found, lest he die and this text be lost. He had to go to Terris.
Or . . . to
Luthadel. From there he could send messages north. He had a valid
excuse to get back to the center of action, to see the other
crewmembers again.
Why did that make
him feel even more guilty?
When I finally
had the realization—finally connected all of the signs of the
Anticipation to Alendi—I was so excited. Yet, when I announced
my discovery to the other Worldbringers, I was met with scorn.
Oh, how I wish
that I had listened to them.





13
MIST SWIRLED AND
SPUN, LIKE monochrome paints running together on a canvas. Light died
in the west, and night came of age.
Vin frowned. "Does
it seem like the mists are coming earlier?"
"Earlier?"
OreSeur asked in his muffled voice. The kandra wolfhound sat next to
her on the rooftop.
Vin nodded.
"Before, the mists didn't start to appear until after it grew
dark, right?"
"It is dark,
Mistress."
"But they're
already here—they started to gather when the sun was barely
beginning to set."
"I don't see
that it matters, Mistress. Perhaps the mists are simply like other
weather patterns—they vary, sometimes."
"Doesn't it
even seem a little strange to you?"
"I will think
it strange if you wish me to, Mistress," OreSeur said.
"That isn't
what I meant."
"I apologize,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "Tell me what you do mean,
and I will be certain to believe as commanded."
Vin sighed, rubbing
her brow. I wish Sazed were back . . . she thought. It was an
idle wish, however. Even if Sazed were in Luthadel, he wouldn't be
her steward. The Terrismen no longer called any man master. She'd
have to make do with OreSeur. The kandra, at least, could provide
information that Sazed could not—assuming she could get it out
of him.
"We need to
find the impostor," Vin said. "The one who . . . replaced
someone."
"Yes,
Mistress," OreSeur said.
Vin sat back in the
mists, reclining on a slanted rooftop, resting her arms back on the
tiles. "Then, I need to know more about you."
"Me,
Mistress?"
"Kandra in
general. If I'm going to find this impostor, I need to know how he
thinks, need to understand his motivations."
"His
motivations will be simple, Mistress," OreSeur said. "He
will be following his Contract."
"What if he's
acting without a Contract?"
OreSeur shook his
canine head. "Kandra always have a Contract. Without one, they
are not allowed to enter human society."
"Never?"
Vin asked.
"Never."
"And what if
this is some kind of rogue kandra?" Vin said.
"Such a thing
does not exist," OreSeur said firmly.
Oh? Vin
thought skeptically. However, she let the matter drop. There was
little reason for a kandra to infiltrate the palace on his own; it
was far more likely that one of Elend's enemies had sent the
creature. One of the warlords, perhaps, or maybe the obligators. Even
the other nobility in the city would have had good reason to spy on
Elend.
"Okay,"
Vin said. "The kandra is a spy, sent to gather information for
another human."
"Yes."
"But,"
Vin said, "if he did take the body of someone in the palace, he
didn't kill them himself. Kandra can't kill humans, right?"
OreSeur nodded. "We
are all bound by that rule."
"So, somebody
snuck into the palace, murdered a member of the staff, then had their
kandra take the body." She paused, trying to work through the
problem. "The most dangerous possibilities—the
crewmembers—should be considered first. Fortunately, since the
killing happened yesterday, we can eliminate Breeze, who was outside
the city at the time."
OreSeur nodded.
"We can
eliminate Elend as well," Vin said. "He was with us on the
wall yesterday."
"That still
leaves the majority of the crew, Mistress."
Vin frowned,
sitting back. She'd tried to establish solid alibis for Ham, Dockson,
Clubs, and Spook. However, all of them had had at least a few hours
unaccounted for. Long enough for a kandra to digest them and take
their place.
"All right,"
she said. "So, how do I find the impostor? How can I tell him
from other people?"
OreSeur sat quietly
in the mists.
"There has to
be a way," Vin said. "His imitation can't be perfect. Would
cutting him work?"
OreSeur shook his
head. "Kandra replicate a body perfectly, Mistress—blood,
flesh, skin, and muscle. You have seen that when I split my skin."
Vin sighed,
standing and stepping up on the tip of the peaked rooftop. The mists
were already full, and the night was quickly becoming black. She
began to walk idly back and forth on the ridge, an Allomancer's
balance keeping her from falling.
"Perhaps I can
just see who isn't acting oddly," she said. "Are most
kandra as good at imitation as you are?"
"Among kandra,
my own skill is average. Some are worse, others are better."
"But no actor
is perfect," Vin said.
"Kandra don't
often make mistakes, Mistress," OreSeur said. "But, this is
probably your best method. Be warned, however—he could be
anyone. My kind are very skilled."
Vin paused. It's
not Elend, she told herself forcibly. He was with me all day
yesterday. Except in the morning.
Too long,
she decided. We were on the wall for hours, and those bones were
freshly expelled. Besides, I'd know if it were him . . . wouldn't I?
She shook her head.
"There has to be another way. Can I spot a kandra with Allomancy
somehow?"
OreSeur didn't
answer immediately. She turned toward him in the darkness, studying
his canine face. "What?" she asked.
"These are not
things we speak of with outsiders."
Vin sighed. "Tell
me anyway."
"Do you
command me to speak?"
"I don't
really care to command you in anything."
"Then I may
leave?" OreSeur asked. "You do not wish to command me, so
our Contract is dissolved?"
"That isn't
what I meant," Vin said.
OreSeur frowned—a
strange expression to see on a dog's face. "It would be easier
for me if you would try to say what you mean, Mistress."
Vin gritted her
teeth. "Why is it you're so hostile?"
"I'm not
hostile, Mistress. I am your servant, and will do as you command.
That is part of the Contract."
"Sure. Are you
like this with all of your masters?"
"With most, I
am fulfilling a specific role," OreSeur said. "I have bones
to imitate—a person to become, a personality to adopt. You have
given me no direction; just the bones of this . . . animal."
So that's it,
Vin thought. Still annoyed by the dog's body. "Look,
those bones don't really change anything. You are still the same
person."
"You do not
understand. It is not who a kandra is that's important. It's
who a kandra becomes. The bones he takes, the role he
fulfills. None of my previous masters have asked me to do something
like this."
"Well, I'm not
like other masters," Vin said. "Anyway, I asked you a
question. Is there a way I can spot a kandra with Allomancy? And yes,
I command you to speak."
A flash of triumph
shone in OreSeur's eyes, as if he enjoyed forcing her into her role.
"Kandra cannot be affected by mental Allomancy, Mistress."
Vin frowned. "Not
at all?"
"No,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "You can try to Riot or Soothe our
emotions, if you wish, but it will have no effect. We won't even know
that you are trying to manipulate us."
Like someone who
is burning copper. "That's not exactly the most useful bit
of information," she said, strolling past the kandra on the
roof. Allomancers couldn't read minds or emotions; when they Soothed
or Rioted another person, they simply had to hope that the person
reacted as intended.
She could "test"
for a kandra by Soothing someone's emotions, perhaps. If they didn't
react, that might mean they were a kandra—but it could also
just mean that they were good at containing their emotions.
OreSeur watched her
pacing. "If it were easy to detect kandra, Mistress, then we
wouldn't be worth much as impostors, would we?"
"I suppose
not," Vin acknowledged. However, thinking about what he'd said
made her consider something else. "Can a kandra use
Allomancy? If they eat an Allomancer, I mean?"
OreSeur shook his
head.
That's another
method, then, Vin thought. If I catch a member of the crew
burning metals, then I know he's not the kandra. Wouldn't help
with Dockson or the palace servants, but it would let her eliminate
Ham and Spook.
"There's
something else," Vin said. "Before, when we were doing the
job with Kelsier, he said that we had to keep you away from the Lord
Ruler and his Inquisitors. Why was that?"
OreSeur looked
away. "This is not a thing we speak of."
"Then I
command you to speak of it."
"Then I must
refuse to answer," OreSeur said.
"Refuse to
answer?" Vin asked. "You can do that?"
OreSeur nodded. "We
are not required to reveal secrets about kandra nature, Mistress. It
is—"
"In the
Contract," Vin finished, frowning. I really need to read that
thing again.
"Yes,
Mistress. I have, perhaps, said too much already."
Vin turned away
from OreSeur, looking out over the city. The mists continued to spin.
Vin closed her eyes, questing out with bronze, trying to feel the
telltale pulse of an Allomancer burning metals nearby.
OreSeur rose and
padded over beside her, then settled down on his haunches again,
sitting on the inclined roof. "Shouldn't you be at the meeting
the king is having, Mistress?"
"Perhaps
later," Vin said, opening her eyes. Out beyond the city,
watchfires from the armies lit the horizon. Keep Venture blazed in
the night to her right, and inside of it, Elend was holding council
with the others. Many of the most important men in the government,
sitting together in one room. Elend would call her paranoid for
insisting that she be the one who watched for spies and assassins.
That was fine; he could call her whatever he wanted, as long as he
stayed alive.
She settled back
down. She was glad Elend had decided to pick Keep Venture as his
palace, rather than moving into Kredik Shaw, the Lord Ruler's home.
Not only was Kredik Shaw too big to be properly defended, but it also
reminded her of him. The Lord Ruler.
She thought of the
Lord Ruler often, lately—or, rather, she thought of Rashek, the
man who had become the Lord Ruler. A Terrisman by birth, Rashek had
killed the man who should have taken the power at the Well of
Ascension and . . .
And done what? They
still didn't know. The Hero had been on a quest to protect the people
from a danger simply known as the Deepness. So much had been lost; so
much had been intentionally destroyed. Their best source of
information about those days came in the form of an aged journal,
written by the Hero of Ages during the days before Rashek had killed
him. However, it gave precious few clues about his quest.
Why do I even
worry about these things? Vin thought. The Deepness is a thing
a thousand years forgotten. Elend and the others are right to be
concerned about more pressing events.
And still, Vin
found herself strangely detached from them. Perhaps that was why she
found herself scouting outside. It wasn't that she didn't worry about
the armies. She just felt . . . removed from the problem. Even now,
as she considered the threat to Luthadel, her mind was drawn back to
the Lord Ruler.
You don't know
what I do for mankind, he had said. I was your god, even if
you couldn't see it. By killing me, you have doomed yourselves.
Those were the Lord Ruler's last words, spoken as he lay dying on the
floor of his own throne room. They worried her. Chilled her, even
still.
She needed to
distract herself. "What kinds of things do you like, kandra?"
she asked, turning to the creature, who still sat on the rooftop
beside her. "What are your loves, your hatreds?"
"I do not want
to answer that."
Vin frowned. "Do
not want to, or do not have to?"
OreSeur paused. "Do
not want to, Mistress." The implication was obvious. You're
going to have to command me.
She almost did.
However, something gave her pause, something in those eyes—inhuman
though they were. Something familiar.
She'd known
resentment like that. She'd felt it often during her youth, when
she'd served crewleaders who had lorded over their followers. In the
crews, one did what one was commanded—especially if one was a
small waif of a girl, without rank or means of intimidation.
"If you don't
wish to speak of it," Vin said, turning away from the kandra,
"then I won't force you."
OreSeur was silent.
Vin breathed in the
mist, its cool wetness tickling her throat and lungs. "Do you
know what I love, kandra?"
"No,
Mistress."
"The mists,"
she said, holding out her arms. "The power, the freedom."
OreSeur nodded
slowly. Nearby, Vin felt a faint pulsing with her bronze. Quiet,
strange, unnerving. It was the same odd pulsing that she had felt
atop Keep Venture a few nights before. She had never been brave
enough to investigate it again.
It's time to do
something about that, she decided. "Do you know what I hate,
kandra?" she whispered, falling to a crouch, checking her knives
and metals.
"No,
Mistress."
She turned, meeting
OreSeur's eyes. "I hate being afraid."
She knew that
others thought her jumpy. Paranoid. She had lived with fear for so
long that she had once seen it as something natural, like the ash,
the sun, or the ground itself.
Kelsier had taken
that fear away. She was careful, still, but she didn't feel a
constant sense of terror. The Survivor had given her a life where the
ones she loved didn't beat her, had shown her something better than
fear. Trust. Now that she knew of these things, she would not quickly
surrender them. Not to armies, not to assassins . . .
Not even to
spirits.
"Follow if you
can," she whispered, then dropped off the rooftop to the street
below.
She dashed along
the mist-slicked street, building momentum before she had time to
lose her nerve. The source of the bronze pulses was close; it came
from only one street over, in a building. Not the top, she decided.
One of the darkened windows on the third floor, the shutters open.
Vin dropped a coin
and jumped into the air. She shot upward, angling herself by Pushing
against a latch across the street. She landed in the window's pitlike
opening, arms grabbing the sides of the frame. She flared tin,
letting her eyes adjust to the deep darkness within the abandoned
room.
And it was there.
Formed entirely of mists, it shifted and spun, its outline vague in
the dark chamber. It had a vantage to see the rooftop where Vin and
OreSeur had been talking.
Ghosts don't spy
on people . . . do they? Skaa didn't speak of things like spirits
or the dead. It smacked too much of religion, and religion was for
the nobility. To worship was death for skaa. That hadn't stopped
some, of course—but thieves like Vin had been too pragmatic for
such things.
There was only one
thing in skaa lore that this creature matched. Mistwraiths. Creatures
said to steal the souls of men foolish enough to go outside at night.
But, Vin now knew what mistwraiths were. They were cousins to the
kandra—strange, semi-intelligent beasts who used the bones of
those they ingested. They were odd, true—but hardly phantoms,
and not really even that dangerous. There were no dark wraiths in the
night, no haunting spirits or ghouls.
Or so Kelsier had
said. The thing standing in the dark room—its insubstantial
form writhing in the mists—seemed a powerful counterexample.
She gripped the sides of the window, fear—her old
friend—returning.
Run. Flee. Hide.
"Why have you
been watching me?" she demanded.
The thing did not
move. Its form seemed to draw the mists forward, and they spun
slightly, as if in an air current.
I can sense it
with bronze. That means it's using Allomancy—and Allomancy
attracts the mist.
The thing stepped
forward. Vin tensed.
And then the spirit
was gone.
Vin paused,
frowning. That was it? She had—
Something grabbed
her arm. Something cold, something terrible, but something very real.
A pain shot through her head, moving as if from her ear and into her
mind. She yelled, but cut off as her voice failed. With a quiet
groan—her arm quivering and shaking—she fell backward out
of the window.
Her arm was still
cold. She could feel it whipping in the air beside her, seeming to
exude chill air. Mist passed like trailing clouds.
Vin flared tin.
Pain, cold, wetness, and lucidity burst into her mind, and she threw
herself into a twist and flared pewter just as she hit the ground.
"Mistress?"
OreSeur said, darting from the shadows.
Vin shook her head,
pushing herself up to her knees, her palms cool against the slick
cobblestones. She could still feel the trailing chill in her left
arm.
"Shall I go
for aid?" the wolfhound asked.
Vin shook her head,
forcing herself into a wobbling stand. She looked upward, through
swirling mists, toward the black window above.
She shivered. Her
shoulder was sore from where she had hit the ground, and her still
bruised side throbbed, but she could feel her strength returning. She
stepped away from the building, still looking up. Above her, the deep
mists seemed . . . ominous. Obscuring.
No, she
thought forcefully. The mists are my freedom; the night is my
home! This is where I belong. I haven't needed to be afraid in the
night since Kelsier taught me otherwise.
She couldn't lose
that. She wouldn't go back to the fear. Still, she couldn't help the
quick urgency in her step as she waved to OreSeur and scampered away
from the building. She gave no explanation for her strange actions.
He didn't ask for
one.
Elend set a third
pile of books onto the table, and it slumped against the other two,
threatening to topple the entire lot to the floor. He steadied them,
then glanced up.
Breeze, in a prim
suit, regarded the table with amusement as he sipped his wine. Ham
and Spook were playing a game of stones as they waited for the
meeting to begin; Spook was winning. Dockson sat in the corner of the
room, scribbling on a ledger, and Clubs sat in a deep plush chair,
eyeing Elend with one of his stares.
Any of these men
could be an impostor, Elend thought. The thought still seemed
insane to him. What was he to do? Exclude them all from his
confidence? No, he needed them too much.
The only option was
to act normally and watch them. Vin had told him to try and spot
inconsistencies in their personalities. He intended to do his best,
but the reality was he wasn't sure how much he would be able to see.
This was more Vin's area of expertise. He needed to worry about the
armies.
Thinking of her, he
glanced at the stained-glass window at the back of the study, and was
surprised to see it was dark.
That late
already? Elend thought.
"My dear man,"
Breeze noted. "When you told us you needed to 'go and gather a
few important references,' you might have warned us that you were
planning to be gone for two full hours."
"Yes, well,"
Elend said, "I kind of lost track of time . . . ."
"For two
hours?"
Elend nodded
sheepishly. "There were books involved."
Breeze shook his
head. "If the fate of the Central Dominance weren't at stake—and
if it weren't so fantastically enjoyable to watch Hammond lose an
entire month's earnings to the boy there—I'd have left an hour
ago."
"Yes, well, we
can get started now," Elend said.
Ham chuckled,
standing up. "Actually, it's kind of like the old days. Kell
always arrived late, too—and he liked to hold his meetings at
night. Mistborn hours."
Spook smiled, his
coin pouch bulging.
We still use
boxings—Lord Ruler imperials—as our coinage, Elend
thought. We'll have to do something about that.
"I miss the
charcoal board, though," Spook said.
"I certainly
don't," Breeze replied. "Kell had atrocious handwriting."
"Absolutely
atrocious," Ham said with a smile, sitting. "You have to
admit, though—it was distinctive."
Breeze raised an
eyebrow. "It was that, I suppose."
Kelsier, the
Survivor of Hathsin, Elend thought. Even his handwriting is
legendary. "Regardless," he said, "I think perhaps
we should get to work. We've still got two armies waiting out there.
We're not leaving tonight until we have a plan to deal with them!"
The crewmembers
shared looks.
"Actually,
Your Majesty," Dockson said, "we've already worked on that
problem for a bit."
"Oh?"
Elend asked, surprised. Well, I guess I did leave them alone for a
couple of hours. "Let me hear it, then."
Dockson stood,
pulling his chair a bit closer to join the rest of the group, and Ham
began to speak.
"Here's the
thing, El," Ham said. "With two armies here, we don't have
to worry about an immediate attack. But, we're still in serious
danger. This will probably turn into an extended siege as each army
tries to outlast the other."
"They'll try
to starve us out," Clubs said. "Weaken us, and their
enemies, before attacking."
"And,"
Ham continued, "that puts us in a bind—because we can't
last very long. The city is already on the edge of starvation—and
the enemy kings are probably aware of that fact."
"What are you
saying?" Elend asked slowly.
"We have to
make an alliance with one of those armies, Your Majesty,"
Dockson said. "They both know it. Alone, they can't reliably
defeat one another. With our help, however, the balance will be
tipped."
"They'll hem
us in," Ham said. "Keep us blockaded until we get desperate
enough to side with one of them. Eventually, we'll have to do
so—either that, or let our people starve."
"The decision
comes down to this," Breeze said. "We can't outlast the
others, so we have to choose which of those men we want to
take over the city. And, I would suggest making our decision quickly
as opposed to waiting while our supplies run out."
Elend stood
quietly. "By making a deal with one of those armies, we'll
essentially be giving away our kingdom."
"True,"
Breeze said, tapping the side of his cup. "However, what I
gained us by bringing a second army is bargaining power. You see, at
least we are in a position to demand something in exchange for our
kingdom."
"What good is
that?" Elend asked. "We still lose."
"It's better
than nothing," Breeze said. "I think that we might be able
to persuade Cett to leave you as a provisional leader in Luthadel. He
doesn't like the Central Dominance; he finds it barren and flat."
"Provisional
leader of the city," Elend said with a frown. "That is
somewhat different from king of the Central Dominance."
"True,"
Dockson said. "But, every emperor needs good men to administrate
the cities under their rule. You wouldn't be king, but you—and
our armies—would live through the next few months, and Luthadel
wouldn't be pillaged."
Ham, Breeze, and
Dockson all sat resolutely, looking him in the eye. Elend glanced
down at his pile of books, thinking of his research and study.
Worthless. How long had the crew known that there was only one course
of action?
The crew seemed to
take Elend's silence as assent.
"Cett really
is the best choice, then?" Dockson asked. "Perhaps Straff
would be more likely to make an agreement with Elend—they are,
after all, family."
Oh, he'd make an
agreement, Elend thought. And he'd break it the moment it was
convenient. But . . . the alternative? Give the city over to this
Cett? What would happen to this land, this people, if he were in
charge?
"Cett is best,
I think," Breeze said. "He is very willing to let others
rule, as long as he gets his glory and his coins. The problem is
going to be that atium. Cett thinks it is here, and if he doesn't
find it . . . "
"We just let
him search the city," Ham said.
Breeze nodded.
"You'd have to persuade him that I misled him about the
atium—and that shouldn't be too hard, considering what he
thinks of me. Which is another small matter—you'll have to
convince him that I've been dealt with. Perhaps he'd believe that I
was executed as soon as Elend found out I had raised an army against
him."
The others nodded.
"Breeze?"
Elend asked. "How does Lord Cett treat the skaa in his lands?"
Breeze paused, then
glanced away. "Not well, I'm afraid."
"Now, see,"
Elend said. "I think we need to consider how to best protect our
people. I mean, if we give everything over to Cett, then we'd save my
skin—but at the cost of the entire skaa population of the
dominance!"
Dockson shook his
head. "Elend, it's not a betrayal. Not if this is the only way."
"That's easy
to say," Elend said. "But I'm the one who'd have to bear
the guilty conscience for doing such a thing. I'm not saying that we
should throw out your suggestion, but I do have a few ideas that we
might talk about . . . ."
The others shared
looks. As usual, Clubs and Spook remained quiet during proceedings;
Clubs only spoke when he felt it absolutely necessary, and Spook
tended to stay on the periphery of the conversations. Finally,
Breeze, Ham, and Dockson looked back at Elend.
"This is your
country, Your Majesty," Dockson said carefully. "We're
simply here to give advice." Very good advice, his tone
implied.
"Yes, well,"
Elend said, quickly selecting a book. In his haste, he knocked over
one of the stacks, sending a clatter of books across the table and
landing a volume in Breeze's lap.
"Sorry,"
Elend said, as Breeze rolled his eyes and sat the book back up on the
table. Elend pulled open his own book. "Now, this volume had
some very interesting things to say about the movement and
arrangement of troop bodies—"
"Uh, El?"
Ham asked, frowning. "That looks like a book on shipping grain."
"I know,"
Elend said. "There weren't a lot of books about warfare in the
library. I guess that's what we get for a thousand years without any
wars. However, this book does mention how much grain it took to keep
the various garrisons in the Final Empire stocked. Do you have any
idea how much food an army needs?"
"You have a
point," Clubs said, nodding. "Usually, it's a blasted pain
to keep soldiers fed; we often had supply problems fighting on the
frontier, and we were only small bands, sent to quell the occasional
rebellion."
Elend nodded. Clubs
didn't often speak of his past fighting in the Lord Ruler's army—and
the crew didn't often ask him about it.
"Anyway,"
Elend said, "I'll bet both Cett and my father are unaccustomed
to moving large bodies of men. There will be supply problems,
especially for Cett, since he marched so hastily."
"Maybe not,"
Clubs said. "Both armies have secured canal routes into
Luthadel. That will make it easy for them to send for more supplies."
"Plus,"
Breeze added, "though much of Cett's land is in revolt right
now, he does still hold the city of Haverfrex, which held one
of the Lord Ruler's main canneries. Cett has a remarkable amount of
food a short canal trip away."
"Then, we
disrupt the canals," Elend said. "We find a way to stop
those supplies from coming. Canals make resupply quick, but also
vulnerable, since we know exactly which route it will take. And, if
we can take away their food, perhaps they'll be forced to turn around
and march home."
"Either that,"
Breeze said, "or they'll just decide to risk attacking
Luthadel."
Elend paused.
"That's a possibility," he said. "But, well, I've been
researching how to hold the city as well." He reached across the
table, picking up a book. "Now, this is Jendellah's City
Management in the Modern Era. He mentions how difficult Luthadel
is to police because of its extreme size and large number of skaa
slums. He suggests using roving bands of city watchmen. I think we
could adapt his methods to use in a battle—our wall is too long
to defend in detail, but if we had mobile bands of troops that could
respond to—"
"Your
Majesty," Dockson interrupted.
"Hum? Yes?"
"We've got a
troop of boys and men who have barely a year's training, and we're
facing not one overwhelming force, but two. We can't win this
battle by force."
"Oh, yes,"
Elend said. "Of course. I was just saying that if we did
have to fight, I have some strategies . . . ."
"If we fight,
we lose," Clubs said. "We'll probably lose anyway."
Elend paused for a
moment. "Yes, well, I just . . . "
"Attacking the
canal routes is a good idea, though," Dockson said. "We can
do that covertly, perhaps hire some of the bandits in the area to
attack supply barges. It probably won't be enough to send Cett or
Straff home, but we could make them more desperate to make alliances
with us."
Breeze nodded.
"Cett's already worried about instability back in his home
dominance. We should send him a preliminary messenger, let him know
we're interested in an alliance. That way, as soon as his supply
problems begin, he'll think of us."
"We could even
send him a letter explaining Breeze's execution," Dockson said,
"as a sign of good faith. That—"
Elend cleared his
throat. The others paused.
"I, uh, wasn't
finished yet," Elend said.
"I apologize,
Your Majesty," Dockson said.
Elend took a deep
breath. "You're right—we can't afford to fight those
armies. But, I think we need to find a way to get them to fight each
other."
"A pleasant
sentiment, my dear man," Breeze said. "But getting those
two to attack one another isn't as simple as persuading Spook over
there to refill my wine." He turned, holding out his empty cup.
Spook paused, then sighed, rising to fetch the wine bottle.
"Well, yes,"
Elend said. "But, while there aren't a lot of books on warfare,
there are a lot about politics. Breeze, you said the other day
that being the weakest party in a three-way stalemate gives us
power."
"Exactly,"
Breeze said. "We can tip the battle for either of the two larger
sides."
"Yes,"
Elend said, opening a book. "Now that there are three parties
involved, it's not warfare—it's politics. This is just like a
contest between houses. And in house politicking, even the most
powerful houses can't stand without allies. The small houses are weak
individually, but they are strong when considered as a group.
"We're like
one of those small houses. If we want to make any gains, we're going
to have to get our enemies to forget about us—or, at least,
make them think us inconsequential. If they both assume that they
have the better of us—that they can use us to defeat the other
army, then turn on us at their leisure—then they'll leave us
alone and concentrate on each other."
Ham rubbed his
chin. "You're talking about playing both sides, Elend. It's a
dangerous position to put ourselves in."
Breeze nodded.
"We'd have to switch our allegiance to whichever side seems
weaker at the moment, keep them snapping at each other. And there's
no guarantee that the winner between the two would be weakened enough
for us to defeat."
"Not to
mention our food problems," Dockson said. "What you propose
would take time, Your Majesty. Time during which we'd be under siege,
our supplies dwindling. It's autumn right now. Winter will soon be
upon us."
"It will be
tough," Elend agreed. "And risky. But, I think we can do
it. We make them both think we're allied with them, but we
hold back our support. We encourage them against one another, and we
wear away at their supplies and morale, pushing them into a conflict.
When the dust settles, the surviving army might just be weak enough
for us to beat."
Breeze looked
thoughtful. "It has style," he admitted. "And, it does
kind of sound fun."
Dockson smiled.
"You only say that because it involves making someone else do
our work for us."
Breeze shrugged.
"Manipulation works so well on a personal level, I don't see why
it wouldn't be an equally viable national policy."
"That's
actually how most rulership works," Ham mused. "What is a
government but an institutionalized method of making sure somebody
else does all the work?"
"Uh, the
plan?" Elend asked.
"I don't know,
El," Ham said, getting back on topic. "It sounds like one
of Kell's plans—foolhardy, brave, and a little insane." He
sounded as if he were surprised to hear Elend propose such a measure.
I can be as
foolhardy as any man, Elend thought indignantly, then paused. Did
he really want to follow that line of thought?
"We could get
ourselves into some serious trouble," Dockson said. "If
either side decides it's tired of our games . . . "
"They'll
destroy us," Elend said. "But . . . well, gentlemen, you're
gamblers. You can't tell me that this plan doesn't appeal to you more
than simply bowing before Lord Cett."
Ham shared a look
with Breeze, and they seemed to be considering the idea. Dockson
rolled his eyes, but seemed like he was objecting simply out of
habit.
No, they didn't
want to take the safe way out. These were the men who had challenged
the Lord Ruler, men who had made their livelihood scamming noblemen.
In some ways, they were very careful; they could be precise in their
attention to detail, cautious in covering their tracks and protecting
their interests. But when it came time to gamble for the big prize,
they were often willing.
No, not willing.
Eager.
Great, Elend
thought. I've filled my inner council with a bunch of
thrill-seeking masochists. Even worse, I've decided to join them.
But, what else could he do?
"We could at
least consider it," Breeze said. "It does sound exciting."
"Now, see, I
didn't suggest this because it was exciting, Breeze," Elend
said. "I spent my youth trying to plan how I would make a better
city of Luthadel once I became leader of my house. I'm not going to
throw away those dreams at the first sign of opposition."
"What about
the Assembly?" Ham said.
"That's the
best part," Elend said. "They voted in my proposal at the
meeting two days back. They can't open the city gates to any invader
until I meet with my father in parlay."
The crew sat
quietly for a few moments. Finally, Ham turned to Elend, shaking his
head. "I really don't know, El. It sounds appealing. We actually
discussed a few more daring plans like this while we were waiting for
you. But . . . "
"But what?"
Elend asked.
"A plan like
this depends a lot on you, my dear man," Breeze said, sipping
his wine. "You'd have to be the one to meet with the kings—the
one to persuade them both that we're on their side. No offense, but
you're new to scamming. It's difficult to agree to a daring plan that
puts a newcomer in as the linchpin member of the team."
"I can do
this," Elend said. "Really."
Ham glanced at
Breeze, then both glanced at Clubs. The gnarled general shrugged. "If
the kid wants to try it, then let him."
Ham sighed, then
looked back. "I guess I agree. As long as you're up to this,
El."
"I think I
am," Elend said, covering his nervousness. "I just know we
can't give up, not easily. Maybe this won't work—maybe, after a
couple months of being besieged, we'll just end up giving away the
city anyway. However, that gives us a couple of months during which
something could happen. It's worth the risk to wait, rather
than fold. Wait, and plan."
"All right,
then," Dockson said. "Give us some time to come up with
some ideas and options, Your Majesty. We'll meet again in a few days
to talk about specifics."
"All right,"
Elend said. "Sounds good. Now, if we can move on to other
matters, I'd like to mention—"
A knock came at the
door. At Elend's call, Captain Demoux pushed open the door, looking a
little embarrassed. "Your Majesty?" he said. "I
apologize, but . . . I think we caught someone listening in on your
meeting."
"What?"
Elend said. "Who?"
Demoux turned to
the side, waving in a pair of his guards. The woman they led into the
room was vaguely familiar to Elend. Tall, like most Terris, she wore
a bright-colored, but utilitarian, dress. Her ears were stretched
downward, the lobes elongated to accommodate numerous earrings.
"I recognize
you," Elend said. "From the Assembly hall a few days ago.
You were watching me."
The woman didn't
answer. She looked over the room's occupants, standing stiffly—even
haughtily—despite her bound wrists. Elend had never actually
met a Terriswoman before; he'd only met stewards, eunuchs trained
from birth to work as manservants. For some reason, Elend had
expected a Terriswoman to seem a bit more servile.
"She was
hiding in the next room over," Demoux said. "I'm sorry,
Your Majesty. I don't know how she got past us. We found her
listening against the wall, though I doubt she heard anything. I
mean, those walls are made of stone."
Elend met the
woman's eyes. Older—perhaps fifty—she wasn't beautiful,
but neither was she homely. She was sturdy, with a straightforward,
rectangular face. Her stare was calm and firm, and it made Elend
uncomfortable to hold it for long.
"So, what did
you expect to overhear, woman?" Elend asked.
The Terriswoman
ignored the comment. She turned to the others, and spoke in a lightly
accented voice. "I would speak with the king alone. The rest of
you are excused."
Ham smiled. "Well,
at least she's got nerve."
Dockson addressed
the Terriswoman. "What makes you think that we would leave our
king alone with you?"
"His Majesty
and I have things to discuss," the woman said in a businesslike
manner, as if oblivious of—or unconcerned about—her
status as a prisoner. "You needn't be worried about his safety;
I'm certain that the young Mistborn hiding outside the window will be
more than enough to deal with me."
Elend glanced to
the side, toward the small ventilation window beside the more massive
stained-glass one. How would the Terriswoman have known that Vin was
watching? Her ears would have to be extraordinarily keen. Keen
enough, perhaps, to listen in on the meeting through a stone wall?
Elend turned back
to the newcomer. "You're a Keeper."
She nodded.
"Did Sazed
send you?"
"It is because
of him that I am here," she said. "But I was not 'sent.'"
"Ham, it's all
right," Elend said slowly. "You can go."
"Are you
sure?" Ham asked, frowning.
"Leave me
bound, if you wish," the woman said.
If she really is
a Feruchemist, that won't be much of a hindrance, Elend thought.
Of course, if she really is a Feruchemist—a Keeper, like
Sazed—I shouldn't have anything to fear from her.
Theoretically.
The others shuffled
from the room, their postures indicating what they thought of Elend's
decision. Though they were no longer thieves by profession, Elend
suspected that they—like Vin—would always bear the
effects of their upbringing.
"We'll be just
outside, El," Ham—the last one out—said, then pulled
the door shut.
And yet, any who
know me will realize that there was no chance I would give up so
easily. Once I find something to investigate, I become dogged in my
pursuit.





14
THE TERRISWOMAN
SNAPPED HER BONDS, and the ropes dropped to the floor.
"Uh, Vin?"
Elend said, beginning to wonder about the logic of meeting with this
woman. "Perhaps it's time you came in."
"She's not
actually there," the Terriswoman said offhandedly, walking
forward. "She left a few minutes ago to do her rounds. That is
why I let myself be caught."
"Um, I see,"
Elend said. "I'll be calling for the guards now."
"Don't be a
fool," the Terriswoman said. "If I wanted to kill you, I
could do it before the others got back in. Now be quiet for a
moment."
Elend stood
uncomfortably as the tall woman walked around the table in a slow
circle, studying him as a merchant might inspect a piece of furniture
up for auction. Finally she stopped, placing her hands on her hips.
"Stand up
straight," she commanded.
"Excuse me?"
"You're
slouching," the woman said. "A king must maintain an air of
dignity at all times, even when with his friends."
Elend frowned.
"Now, while I appreciate advice, I don't—"
"No," the
woman said. "Don't hedge. Command."
"Excuse me?"
Elend said again.
The woman stepped
forward, placing a hand on his shoulder and pressing his back firmly
to improve his posture. She stepped back, then nodded slightly to
herself.
"Now, see,"
Elend said. "I don't—"
"No," the
woman interrupted. "You must be stronger in the way that you
speak. Presentation—words, actions, postures—will
determine how people judge you and react to you. If you start every
sentence with softness and uncertainty, you will seem soft and
uncertain. Be forceful!"
"What is going
on here?" Elend demanded, exasperated.
"There,"
the woman said. "Finally."
"You said that
you know Sazed?" Elend asked, resisting the urge to slouch back
into his earlier posture.
"He is an
acquaintance," the woman said. "My name is Tindwyl; I am,
as you have guessed, a Keeper of Terris." She tapped her foot
for a moment, then shook her head. "Sazed warned me about your
slovenly appearance, but I honestly assumed that no king could have
such a poor sense of self-presentation."
"Slovenly?"
Elend asked. "Excuse me?"
"Stop saying
that," Tindwyl snapped. "Don't ask questions; say what you
mean. If you object, object—don't leave your words up to my
interpretation."
"Yes, well,
while this is fascinating," Elend said, walking toward the door,
"I'd rather avoid further insults this evening. If you'll excuse
me . . . "
"Your people
think you are a fool, Elend Venture," Tindwyl said quietly.
Elend paused.
"The
Assembly—a body you yourself organized—ignores your
authority. The skaa are convinced that you won't be able to protect
them. Even your own council of friends makes their plans in your
absence, assuming your input to be no great loss."
Elend closed his
eyes, taking a slow, deep breath.
"You have good
ideas, Elend Venture," Tindwyl said. "Regal ideas. However,
you are not a king. A man can only lead when others accept him as
their leader, and he has only as much authority as his subjects give
to him. All of the brilliant ideas in the world cannot save your
kingdom if no one will listen to them."
Elend turned. "This
last year I've read every pertinent book on leadership and governance
in the four libraries."
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow. "Then, I suspect that you spent a great deal of time in
your room that you should have been out, being seen by your
people and learning to be a ruler."
"Books have
great value," Elend said.
"Actions have
greater value."
"And where am
I to learn the proper actions?"
"From me."
Elend paused.
"You may know
that every Keeper has an area of special interest," Tindwyl
said. "While we all memorize the same store of information, one
person can only study and understand a limited amount of that store.
Our mutual friend Sazed spends his time on religions."
"And your
specialty?"
"Biographies,"
she said. "I have studied the lives of generals, kings, and
emperors whose names you have never heard. Understanding theories of
politics and leadership, Elend Venture, is not the same as
understanding the lives of men who lived such principles."
"And . . . you
can teach me to emulate those men?"
"Perhaps,"
Tindwyl said. "I haven't yet decided whether or not you're a
hopeless case. But, I am here, so I will do what I can. A few months
ago, I received a letter from Sazed, explaining your predicament. He
did not ask me to come to train you—but, then, Sazed is perhaps
another man who could learn to be more forceful."
Elend nodded
slowly, meeting the Terriswoman's eyes.
"Will you
accept my instruction, then?" she asked.
Elend thought for a
moment. If she's anywhere near as useful as Sazed, then . . .
well, I could certainly use some help at this. "I will,"
he said.
Tindwyl nodded.
"Sazed also mentioned your humility. It could be an
asset—assuming you don't let it get in the way. Now, I believe
that your Mistborn has returned."
Elend turned toward
the side window. The shutter swung open, allowing mist to begin
streaming into the room and revealing a crouching, cloaked form.
"How did you
know I was here?" Vin asked quietly.
Tindwyl smiled—the
first such expression Elend had seen on her face. "Sazed
mentioned you as well, child. You and I should speak soon in private,
I think."
Vin slipped into
the room, drawing mist in behind her, then closed the shutter. She
didn't bother to hide her hostility or mistrust as she put herself
between Elend and Tindwyl.
"Why are you
here?" Vin demanded.
Tindwyl smiled
again. "It took your king there several minutes to get to that
question, and here you ask it after a few bare moments. You are an
interesting couple, I think."
Vin's eyes
narrowed.
"Regardless, I
should withdraw," Tindwyl said. "We shall speak again, I
assume, Your Majesty?"
"Yes, of
course," Elend said. "Um . . . is there anything I should
begin practicing?"
"Yes,"
Tindwyl said, walking to the door. "Stop saying 'um.'"
"Right."
Ham poked his head
in the door as soon as Tindwyl opened it. He immediately noticed her
discarded bonds. He didn't say anything, however; he likely assumed
that Elend had freed her.
"I think we're
done for the night, everyone," Elend said. "Ham, would you
see that Mistress Tindwyl is given quarters in the palace? She's a
friend of Sazed's."
Ham shrugged. "All
right, then." He nodded to Vin, then withdrew. Tindwyl did not
bid them good night as she left.
Vin frowned, then
glanced at Elend. He seemed . . . distracted. "I don't like
her," she said.
Elend smiled,
stacking up the books on his table. "You don't like anyone when
you first meet them, Vin."
"I liked you."
"Thereby
demonstrating that you are a terrible judge of character."
Vin paused, then
smiled. She walked over and began picking through the books. They
weren't typical Elend fare—far more practical than the kinds of
things he usually read. "How did it go tonight?" she asked.
"I didn't have much time to listen."
Elend sighed. He
turned, sitting down on the table, looking up at the massive rose
window at the back of the room. It was dark, its colors only hinted
as reflections in the black glass. "It went well, I suppose."
"I told you
they'd like your plan. It's the sort of thing they'll find
challenging."
"I suppose,"
Elend said.
Vin frowned. "All
right," she said, hopping up to stand on the table. She sat down
beside him. "What is it? Is it something that woman said? What
did she want, anyway?"
"Just to pass
on some knowledge," he said. "You know how Keepers are,
always wanting an ear to listen to their lessons."
"I suppose,"
Vin said slowly. She hadn't ever seen Elend depressed, but he did get
discouraged. He had so many ideas, so many plans and hopes, that she
sometimes wondered how he kept them all straight. She would have said
that he lacked focus; Reen had always said that focus kept a thief
alive. Elend's dreams, however, were so much a part of who he was.
She doubted he could discard them. She didn't think she would want
him to, for they were part of what she loved about him.
"They agreed
to the plan, Vin," Elend said, still looking up at the window.
"They even seemed excited, like you said they'd be. It's just .
. . I can't help thinking that their suggestion was far more rational
than mine. They wanted to side with one of the armies, giving it our
support in exchange for leaving me as a subjugated ruler in
Luthadel."
"That would be
giving up," Vin said.
"Sometimes,
giving up is better than failing. I just committed my city to an
extended siege. That will mean hunger, perhaps starvation, before
this is over with."
Vin put a hand on
his shoulder, watching him uncertainly. Usually, he was the one who
reassured her. "It's still a better way," she said. "The
others probably just suggested a weaker plan because they thought you
wouldn't go along with something more daring."
"No,"
Elend said. "They weren't pandering to me, Vin. They really
thought that making a strategic alliance was a good, safe plan."
He paused, then looked at her. "Since when did that group
represent the reasonable side of my government?"
"They've had
to grow," Vin said. "They can't be the men they once were,
not with this much responsibility."
Elend turned back
toward the window. "I'll tell you what worries me, Vin. I'm
worried that their plan wasn't reasonable—perhaps it
itself was a bit foolhardy. Perhaps making an alliance would have
been a difficult enough task. If that's the case, then what I'm
proposing is just downright ludicrous."
Vin squeezed his
shoulder. "We fought the Lord Ruler."
"You had
Kelsier then."
"Not that
again."
"I'm sorry,"
Elend said. "But, really, Vin. Maybe my plan to try and hold on
to the government is just arrogance. What was it you told me about
your childhood? When you were in the thieving crews, and everyone was
bigger, stronger, and meaner than you, what did you do? Did you stand
up to the leaders?"
Memories flashed in
her mind. Memories of hiding, of keeping her eyes down, of weakness.
"That was
then," she said. "You can't let others beat on you forever.
That's what Kelsier taught me—that's why we fought the Lord
Ruler. That's why the skaa rebellion fought the Final Empire all
those years, even when there was no chance of winning. Reen taught me
that the rebels were fools. But Reen is dead now—and so is the
Final Empire. And . . . "
She leaned down,
catching Elend's eyes. "You can't give up the city, Elend,"
she said quietly. "I don't think I'd like what that would do to
you."
Elend paused, then
smiled slowly. "You can be very wise sometimes, Vin."
"You think
that?"
He nodded.
"Well,"
she said, "then obviously you're as poor a judge of character as
I am."
Elend laughed,
putting his arm around her, hugging her against his side. "So, I
assume the patrol tonight was uneventful?"
The mist spirit.
Her fall. The chill she could still feel—if only faintly
remembered—in her forearm. "It was," she said. The
last time she'd told him of the mist spirit, he'd immediately thought
she'd been seeing things.
"See,"
Elend said, "you should have come to the meeting; I would have
liked to have had you here."
She said nothing.
They sat for a few
minutes, looking up at the dark window. There was an odd beauty to
it; the colors weren't visible because of the lack of back light, and
she could instead focus on the patterns of glass. Chips, slivers,
slices, and plates woven together within a framework of metal.
"Elend?"
she finally said. "I'm worried."
"I'd be
concerned if you weren't," he said. "Those armies have me
so worried that I can barely think straight."
"No," Vin
said. "Not about that. I'm worried about other things."
"Like what?"
"Well . . .
I've been thinking about what the Lord Ruler said, right before I
killed him. Do you remember?"
Elend nodded. He
hadn't been there, but she'd told him.
"He talked
about what he'd done for mankind," Vin said. "He saved us,
the stories say. From the Deepness."
Elend nodded.
"But,"
Vin said, "what was the Deepness? You were a
nobleman—religion wasn't forbidden to you. What did the
Ministry teach about the Deepness and the Lord Ruler?"
Elend shrugged.
"Not much, really. Religion wasn't forbidden, but it wasn't
encouraged either. There was something proprietary about the
Ministry, an air that implied they would take care of religious
things—that we didn't need to worry ourselves."
"But they did
teach you about some things, right?"
Elend nodded.
"Mostly, they talked about why the nobility were privileged and
the skaa cursed. I guess they wanted us to understand how fortunate
we were—though honestly, I always found the teachings a little
disturbing. See, they claimed that we were noble because our
ancestors supported the Lord Ruler before the Ascension. But, that
means that we were privileged because of what other people had done.
Not really fair, eh?"
Vin shrugged. "Fair
as anything else, I guess."
"But, didn't
you get angry?" Elend said. "Didn't it frustrate you that
the nobility had so much while you had so little?"
"I didn't
think about it," Vin said. "The nobility had a lot, so we
could take it from them. Why should I care how they got it?
Sometimes, when I had food, other thieves beat me and took it. What
did it matter how I got my food? It was still taken from me."
Elend paused. "You
know, sometimes I wonder what the political theorists I've read would
say if they met you. I have a feeling they'd throw up their hands in
frustration."
She poked him in
the side. "Enough politics. Tell me about the Deepness."
"Well, I think
it was a creature of some sort—a dark and evil thing that
nearly destroyed the world. The Lord Ruler traveled to the Well of
Ascension, where he was given the power to defeat the Deepness and
unite mankind. There are several statues in the city depicting the
event."
Vin frowned. "Yes,
but they never really show what the Deepness looked like. It's
depicted as a twisted lump at the Lord Ruler's feet."
"Well, the
last person who actually saw the Deepness died a year ago, so I guess
we'll have to make do with the statues."
"Unless it
comes back," Vin said quietly.
Elend frowned,
looking at her again. "Is that what this is about, Vin?"
His face softened slightly. "Two armies aren't enough? You have
to worry about the fate of the world as well?"
Vin glanced down
sheepishly, and Elend laughed, pulling her close. "Ah, Vin. I
know you're a bit paranoid—honestly, considering our situation,
I'm starting to feel the same—but I think this is one problem
you don't have to worry about. I haven't heard any reports of
monstrous incarnations of evil rampaging across the land."
Vin nodded, and
Elend leaned back a bit, obviously assuming that he'd answered her
question.
The Hero of Ages
traveled to the Well of Ascension to defeat the Deepness, she
thought. But the prophecies all said that the Hero shouldn't take
the Well's power for himself. He was supposed to give it, trust in
the power itself to destroy the Deepness.
Rashek didn't do
that—he took the power for himself. Wouldn't that mean that the
Deepness was never defeated? Why, then, wasn't the world destroyed?
"The red sun
and brown plants," Vin said. "Did the Deepness do that?"
"Still
thinking about that?" Elend frowned. "Red sun and brown
plants? What other colors would they be?"
"Kelsier said
that the sun was once yellow, and plants were green."
"That's an odd
image."
"Sazed agrees
with Kelsier," Vin said. "The legends all say that during
the early days of the Lord Ruler, the sun changed colors, and ash
began to fall from the skies."
"Well,"
Elend said, "I guess the Deepness could have had
something to do with it. I don't know, honestly." He sat
musingly for a few moments. "Green plants? Why not purple or
blue? So odd . . . ."
The Hero of Ages
traveled north, to the Well of Ascension, Vin thought again. She
turned slightly, her eyes drawn toward the Terris mountains so far
away. Was it still up there? The Well of Ascension?
"Did you have
any luck getting information out of OreSeur?" Elend asked.
"Anything to help us find the spy?"
Vin shrugged. "He
told me that kandra can't use Allomancy."
"So, you can
find our impostor that way?" Elend said, perking up.
"Maybe,"
Vin said. "I can test Spook and Ham, at least. Regular people
will be more difficult—though kandra can't be Soothed, so maybe
that will let me find the spy."
"That sounds
promising," Elend said.
Vin nodded. The
thief in her, the paranoid girl that Elend always teased, itched to
use Allomancy on him—to test him, to see if he reacted to her
Pushes and Pulls. She stopped herself. This one man she would trust.
The others she would test, but she would not question Elend. In a
way, she'd rather trust him and be wrong than deal with the worry of
mistrust.
I finally
understand, she thought with a start. Kelsier. I understand
what it was like for you with Mare. I won't make your same mistake.
Elend was looking
at her.
"What?"
she asked.
"You're
smiling," he said. "Do I get to hear the joke?"
She hugged him.
"No," she said simply.
Elend smiled. "All
right then. You can test Spook and Ham, but I'm pretty sure the
impostor isn't one of the crew—I talked to them all today, and
they were all themselves. We need to search the palace staff."
He doesn't know
how good kandra can be. The enemy kandra had probably studied his
victim for months and months, learning and memorizing their every
mannerism.
"I've spoken
to Ham and Demoux," Elend said. "As members of the palace
guard, they know about the bones—and Ham was able to guess what
they were. Hopefully, they can sort through the staff with minimal
disturbance and locate the impostor."
Vin's senses itched
at how trusting Elend was. No, she thought. Let him assume
the best. He has enough to worry about. Besides, perhaps the kandra
is imitating someone outside our core team. Elend can search that
avenue.
And, if the
impostor is a member of the crew . . . Well, that's the sort of
situation where my paranoia comes in handy.
"Anyway,"
Elend said, standing. "I have a few things to check on before it
gets too late."
Vin nodded. He gave
her a long kiss, then left. She sat on the table for a few moments
longer, not looking at the massive rose window, but at the smaller
window to the side, which she'd left slightly open. It stood, a
doorway into the night. Mist churned in the blackness, tentatively
sending tendrils into the room, evaporating quietly in the warmth.
"I will not
fear you," Vin whispered. "And I will find your secret."
She climbed off the table and slipped out the window, back out to
meet with OreSeur and do another check of the palace grounds.
I had determined
that Alendi was the Hero of Ages, and I intended to prove it. I
should have bowed before the will of the others; I shouldn't have
insisted on traveling with Alendi to witness his journeys.
It was
inevitable that Alendi himself would find out what I believed him to
be.





15
ON THE EIGHTH DAY
OUT of the Conventical, Sazed awoke to find himself alone.
He stood, pushing
off his blanket and the light film of ash that had fallen during the
night. Marsh's place beneath the tree's canopy was empty, though a
patch of bare earth indicated where the Inquisitor had slept.
Sazed stood,
following Marsh's footsteps out into the harsh red sunlight. The ash
was deeper here, without the cover of trees, and there was also more
wind blowing it into drifts. Sazed regarded the windswept landscape.
There was no further sign of Marsh.
Sazed returned to
camp. The trees here—in the middle of the Eastern
Dominance—rose twisted and knotted, but they had shelflike,
overlapping branches, thick with brown needles. These provided decent
shelter, though the ash seemed capable of infiltrating any sanctuary.
Sazed made a simple
soup for breakfast. Marsh did not return. Sazed washed his brown
travel robes in a nearby stream. Marsh did not return. Sazed sewed a
rent in his sleeve, oiled his walking boots, and shaved his head.
Marsh did not return. Sazed got out the rubbing he'd made in the
Conventical, transcribed a few words, then forced himself to put the
sheet away—he worried about blurring the words by opening it
too often or by getting ash on it. Better to wait until he could have
a proper desk and clean room.
Marsh did not
return.
Finally, Sazed
left. He couldn't define the sense of urgency that he felt—part
excitement to share what he had learned, part desire to see how Vin
and the young king Elend Venture were handling events in Luthadel.
Marsh knew the way.
He would catch up.
Sazed raised his
hand, shading his eyes against the red sunlight, looking down from
his hilltop vantage. There was a slight darkness on the horizon, to
the east of the main road. He tapped his geography coppermind,
seeking out descriptions of the Eastern Dominance.
The knowledge
swelled his mind, blessing him with recollection. The darkness was a
village named Urbene. He searched through one of his indexes, looking
for the right gazetteer. The index was growing fuzzy, its information
difficult to remember—which meant that he'd switched it from
coppermind to memory and back too many times. Knowledge inside a
coppermind would remain pristine, but anything inside his head—even
for only a few moments—would decay. He'd have to re-memorize
the index later.
He found what he
was looking for, and dumped the right memories into his head. The
gazetteer listed Urbene as "picturesque," which probably
meant that some important nobleman had decided to make his manor
there. The listing said that the skaa of Urbene were herdsmen.
Sazed scribbled a
note to himself, then redeposited the gazetteer's memories. Reading
the note told him what he had just forgotten. Like the index, the
gazetteer memories had inevitably decayed slightly during their stay
in his head. Fortunately, he had a second set of copperminds hidden
back up in Terris, and would use those to pass his knowledge on to
another Keeper. His current copperminds were for everyday use.
Unapplied knowledge benefited no one.
He shouldered his
pack. A visit to the village would do him some good, even if it
slowed him down. His stomach agreed with the decision. It was
unlikely the peasants would have much in the way of food, but perhaps
they would be able to provide something other than broth. Besides,
they might have news of events at Luthadel.
He hiked down the
short hill, taking the smaller, eastern fork in the road. Once, there
had been little travel in the Final Empire. The Lord Ruler had
forbidden skaa to leave their indentured lands, and only thieves and
rebels had dared disobey. Still, most of the nobility had made their
livings by trading, so a village such as this one might be accustomed
to visitors.
Sazed began to
notice the oddities immediately. Goats roamed the countryside along
the road, unwatched. Sazed paused, then dug a coppermind from his
pack. He searched through it as he walked. One book on husbandry
claimed that herdsmen sometimes left their flocks alone to graze.
Yet, the unwatched animals made him nervous. He quickened his pace.
Just to the
south, the skaa starve, he thought. Yet here, livestock is so
plentiful that nobody can be spared to keep it safe from bandits or
predators?
The small village
appeared in the distance. Sazed could almost convince himself that
the lack of activity—the lack of movement in the streets, the
derelict doors and shutters swinging in the breeze—was due to
his approach. Perhaps the people were so scared that they were
hiding. Or, perhaps they simply were all out. Tending flocks . . . .
Sazed stopped. A
shift in the wind brought a telltale scent from the village. The skaa
weren't hiding, and they hadn't fled. It was the scent of rotting
bodies.
Suddenly urgent,
Sazed pulled out a small ring—a scent tinmind—and slipped
it on his thumb. The smell on the wind, it didn't seem like that of a
slaughter. It was a mustier, dirtier smell. A smell not only of
death, but of corruption, unwashed bodies, and waste. He reversed the
use of the tinmind, filling it instead of tapping it, and his ability
to smell grew very weak—keeping him from gagging.
He continued on,
carefully entering the village proper. Like most skaa villages,
Urbene was organized simply. It had a group of ten large hovels built
in a loose circle with a well at the center. The buildings were wood,
and for thatching they used the same needle-bearing branches from the
trees he'd seen. Overseers' huts, along with a fine nobleman's manor,
stood a little farther up the valley.
If it hadn't been
for the smell—and the sense of haunted emptiness—Sazed
might have agreed with his gazetteer's description of Urbene. For
skaa residences, the hovels looked well maintained, and the village
lay in a quiet hollow amid the rising landscape.
It wasn't until he
got a little closer that he found the first bodies. They lay
scattered around the doorway to the nearest hovel, about a half-dozen
of them. Sazed approached carefully, but could quickly see that the
corpses were at least several days old. He knelt beside the first
one, that of a woman, and could see no visible cause of death. The
others were the same.
Nervous, Sazed
forced himself to reach up and pull open the door to the hovel. The
stench from inside was so strong that he could smell it through his
tinmind.
The hovel, like
most, was only a single chamber. It was filled with bodies. Most lay
wrapped in thin blankets; some sat with backs pressed up against the
walls, rotting heads hanging limply from their necks. They had gaunt,
nearly fleshless bodies with withered limbs and protruding ribs.
Haunted, unseeing eyes sat in desiccated faces.
These people had
died of starvation and dehydration.
Sazed stumbled from
the hovel, head bowed. He didn't expect to find anything different in
the other buildings, but he checked anyway. He saw the same scene
repeated again and again. Woundless corpses on the ground outside;
many more bodies huddled inside. Flies buzzing about in swarms,
covering faces. In several of the buildings he found gnawed human
bones at the center of the room.
He stumbled out of
the final hovel, breathing deeply through his mouth. Dozens of
people, over a hundred total, dead for no obvious reason. What
possibly could have caused so many of them to simply sit, hidden in
their houses, while they ran out of food and water? How could they
have starved when there were beasts running free? And what had killed
those that he'd found outside, lying in the ash? They didn't seem as
emaciated as the ones inside, though from the level of decomposition,
it was difficult to tell.
I must be
mistaken about the starvation, Sazed told himself. It must
have been a plague of some sort, a disease. That is a much more
logical explanation. He searched through his medical coppermind.
Surely there were diseases that could strike quickly, leaving their
victims weakened. And the survivors must have fled. Leaving behind
their loved ones. Not taking any of the animals from their pastures .
. . .
Sazed frowned. At
that moment, he thought he heard something.
He spun, drawing
auditory power from his hearing tinmind. The sounds were there—the
sound of breathing, the sound of movement, coming from one of the
hovels he'd visited. He dashed forward, throwing open the door,
looking again on the sorry dead. The corpses lay where they had been
before. Sazed studied them very carefully, this time watching until
he found the one whose chest was moving.
By the forgotten
gods . . . Sazed thought. The man didn't need to work hard to
feign death. His hair had fallen out, and his eyes were sunken into
his face. Though he didn't look particularly starved, Sazed must have
missed seeing him because of his dirty, almost corpselike body.
Sazed stepped
toward the man. "I am a friend," he said quietly. The man
remained motionless. Sazed frowned as he walked forward and laid a
hand on the man's shoulder.
The man's eyes
snapped open, and he cried out, jumping to his feet. Dazed and
frenzied, he scrambled over corpses, moving to the back of the room.
He huddled down, staring at Sazed.
"Please,"
Sazed said, setting down his pack. "You mustn't be afraid."
The only food he had besides broth spices was a few handfuls of meal,
but he pulled some out. "I have food."
The man shook his
head. "There is no food," he whispered. "We ate it
all. Except . . . the food." His eyes darted toward the center
of the room. Toward the bones Sazed had noticed earlier. Uncooked,
gnawed on, placed in a pile beneath a ragged cloth, as if to hide
them.
"I didn't eat
the food," the man whispered.
"I know,"
Sazed said, taking a step forward. "But, there is other food.
Outside."
"Can't go
outside."
"Why not?"
The man paused,
then looked down. "Mist."
Sazed glanced
toward the doorway. The sun was nearing the horizon, but wouldn't set
for another hour or so. There was no mist. Not now, anyway.
Sazed felt a chill.
He slowly turned back toward the man. "Mist . . . during the
day?"
The man nodded.
"And it
stayed?" Sazed asked. "It didn't go away after a few
hours?"
The man shook his
head. "Days. Weeks. All mist."
Lord Ruler!
Sazed thought, then caught himself. It had been a long time since
he'd sworn by that creature's name, even in his thoughts.
But for the mist to
come during the day, then to stay—if this man were to be
believed—for weeks . . . Sazed could imagine the skaa,
frightened in their hovels, a thousand years of terror, tradition,
and superstition keeping them from venturing outside.
But to remain
inside until they starved? Even their fear of the mist, deep-seated
though it was, wouldn't have been enough to make them starve
themselves to death, would it?
"Why didn't
you leave?" Sazed asked quietly.
"Some did,"
the man said, nodding as if to himself. "Jell. You know what
happened to him."
Sazed frowned.
"Dead?"
"Taken by the
mist. Oh, how he shook. Was a bull-headed one, you know. Old Jell.
Oh, how he shook. How he writhed when it took him."
Sazed closed his
eyes. The corpses I found outside the doors.
"Some got
away," the man said.
Sazed snapped his
eyes open. "What?"
The crazed villager
nodded again. "Some got away, you know. They called to us, after
leaving the village. Said it was all right. It didn't take them.
Don't know why. It killed others, though. Some, it shook to the
ground, but they got up later. Some it killed."
"The mist let
some survive, but it killed others?"
The man didn't
answer. He'd sat down, and now he lay back, staring unfocused at the
ceiling.
"Please,"
Sazed said. "You must answer me. Who did it kill and who did it
let pass? What is the connection?"
The man turned
toward him. "Time for food," he said, then rose. He
wandered over to a corpse, then pulled on an arm, ripping the rotted
meat free. It was easy to see why he hadn't starved to death like the
others.
Sazed pushed aside
nausea, striding across the room and grabbing the man's arm as he
raised the near fleshless bone to his lips. The man froze, then
looked up at Sazed. "It's not mine!" he yelped, dropping
the bone and running to the back of the room.
Sazed stood for a
moment. I must hurry. I must get to Luthadel. There is more wrong
with this world than bandits and armies.
The wild man
watched with a feral sort of terror as Sazed picked up his pack, then
paused and set it down again. He pulled out his largest pewtermind.
He fastened the wide metal bracer to his forearm, then turned and
walked toward the villager.
"No!" the
man screamed, trying to dash to the side. Sazed tapped the
pewtermind, pulling out a burst of strength. He felt his muscles
enlarge, his robes growing tight. He snatched the villager as the man
ran passed, then held him out, far enough away that the man couldn't
do either of them much harm.
Then he carried the
man outside of the building.
The man stopped
struggling as soon as they emerged into the sunlight. He looked up,
as if seeing the sun for the first time. Sazed set him down, then
released his pewtermind.
The man knelt,
looking up at the sun, then turned to Sazed. "The Lord Ruler . .
. why did he abandon us? Why did he go?"
"The Lord
Ruler was a tyrant."
The man shook his
head. "He loved us. He ruled us. Now that he's gone, the mists
can kill us. They hate us."
Then, surprisingly
adroit, the man leaped to his feet and scrambled down the pathway out
of the village. Sazed took a step forward, but paused. What would he
do? Pull the man all the way to Luthadel? There was water in the well
and there were animals to eat. Sazed could only hope that the poor
wretch would be able to manage.
Sighing, Sazed
returned to the hovel and retrieved his pack. On his way out, he
paused, then pulled out one of his steelminds. Steel held one of the
very most difficult attributes to store up: physical speed. He had
spent months filling this particular steelmind in preparation for the
possibility that someday he might need to run somewhere very, very
quickly.
He put it on now.
Yes, he was the
one who fueled the rumors after that. I could never have done what he
himself did, convincing and persuading the world that he was indeed
the Hero. I don't know if he himself believed it, but he made others
think that he must be the one.





16
VIN RARELY USED HER
QUARTERS. Elend had assigned her spacious rooms—which was,
perhaps, part of the problem. She'd spent her childhood sleeping in
nooks, lairs, or alleys. Having three separate chambers was a bit
daunting.
It didn't really
matter, however. During her time awake she was with either Elend or
the mists. Her rooms existed for her to sleep in. Or, in this case,
for her to make a mess in.
She sat on the
floor in the center of her main chamber. Elend's steward, concerned
that Vin didn't have any furniture, had insisted on decorating her
rooms. This morning, Vin had pushed some of this aside, bunching up
rugs and chairs on one side so that she could sit on the cool stones
with her book.
It was the first
real book she had ever owned, though it was just a collection of
pages bound loosely at one side. That suited her just fine; the
simple binding had made the book that much easier to pull apart.
She sat amid stacks
of paper. It was amazing how many pages there were in the book, once
she had separated them. Vin sat next to one pile, looking over its
contents. She shook her head, then crawled over to another pile. She
leafed through the pages, eventually selecting one.
Sometimes
I wonder if I'm going mad, the words read. Perhaps it is due
to the pressure of knowing that I must somehow bear the burden of an
entire world. Perhaps it is caused by the death I have seen, the
friends I have lost. The friends I have been forced to kill.
Either
way, I sometimes see shadows following me. Dark creatures that I
don't understand, nor do I wish to understand. They are, perhaps,
some figment of my overtaxed mind?
Vin sat for a
moment, rereading the paragraphs. Then she moved the sheet over to
another pile. OreSeur lay on the side of the room, head on paws,
eyeing her. "Mistress," he said as she set down the page,
"I have been watching you work for the last two hours, and will
admit that I am thoroughly confused. What is the point of all this?"
Vin crawled over to
another stack of pages. "I thought you didn't care how I spent
my time."
"I don't,"
OreSeur said. "But I do get bored."
"And annoyed,
apparently."
"I like to
understand what is going on around me."
Vin shrugged,
gesturing toward the stacks of paper. "This is the Lord Ruler's
logbook. Well, actually, it's not the logbook of the Lord Ruler we
knew, but the logbook of the man who should have been the Lord
Ruler."
"Should have
been?" OreSeur asked. "You mean he should have conquered
the world, but didn't?"
"No," Vin
said. "I mean he should have been the one who took the power at
the Well of Ascension. This man, the man who wrote this book—we
don't actually know his name—was some kind of prophesied hero.
Or . . . everyone thought he was. Anyway, the man who became the Lord
Ruler—Rashek—was this hero's packman. Don't you remember
us talking about this, back when you were imitating Renoux?"
OreSeur nodded. "I
recall you briefly mentioning it."
"Well, this is
the book Kelsier and I found when we infiltrated the Lord Ruler's
palace. We thought it was written by the Lord Ruler, but it turns out
it was written by the man the Lord Ruler killed, the man whose place
he took."
"Yes,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "Now, why exactly are you tearing
it to pieces?"
"I'm not,"
Vin said. "I just took off the binding so I could move the pages
around. It helps me think."
"I . . . see,"
OreSeur said. "And, what exactly are you looking for? The Lord
Ruler is dead, Mistress. Last I checked, you killed him."
What am I
looking for? Vin thought, picking up another page. Ghosts in
the mist.
She read the words
on this page slowly.
It
isn't a shadow.
This
dark thing that follows me, the thing that only I can see—it
isn't really a shadow. It is blackish and translucent, but it doesn't
have a shadowlike solid outline. It's insubstantial—wispy and
formless. Like it's made out of black fog.
Or
mist, perhaps.
Vin lowered the
page. It watched him, too, she thought. She remembered reading
the words over a year before, thinking that the Hero must have
started to go mad. With all the pressures on him, who would have been
surprised?
Now, however, she
thought she understood the nameless logbook author better. She knew
he was not the Lord Ruler, and could see him for what he might have
been. Uncertain of his place in the world, but forced into important
events. Determined to do the best he could. Idealistic, in a way.
And the mist spirit
had chased him. What did it mean? What did seeing it imply for her?
She crawled over to
another pile of pages. She'd spent the morning scanning through the
logbook for clues about the mist creature. However, she was having
trouble digging out much beyond these two, familiar passages.
She made piles of
pages that mentioned anything strange or supernatural. She made a
small pile with pages that referenced the mist spirit. She also had a
special pile for references to the Deepness. This last one,
ironically, was both the largest and least informative of the group.
The logbook author had a habit of mentioning the Deepness, but not
saying much about it.
The Deepness was
dangerous, that much was clear. It had ravaged the land, slaying
thousands. The monster had sown chaos wherever it stepped, bringing
destruction and fear, but the armies of mankind had been unable to
defeat it. Only the Terris prophecies and the Hero of Ages had
offered any hope.
If only he had
been more specific! Vin thought with frustration, riffling
papers. However, the tone of the logbook really was more melancholy
than it was informative. It was something that the Hero had written
for himself, to stay sane, to let him put his fears and hopes down on
paper. Elend said he wrote for similar reasons, sometimes. To Vin, it
seemed a silly method of dealing with problems.
With a sigh, she
turned to the last stack of papers—the one with pages she had
yet to study. She lay down on the stone floor and began to read,
searching for useful information.
It took time. Not
only was she a slow reader, but her mind kept wandering. She'd read
the logbook before—and, oddly, hints and phrases from it
reminded her of where she'd been at the time. Two years and a world
away in Fellise, still recovering from her near death at the hands of
a Steel Inquisitor, she'd been forced to spend her days pretending to
be Valette Renoux, a young, inexperienced country noblewoman.
Back then, she
still hadn't believed in Kelsier's plan to overthrow the Final
Empire. She'd stayed with the crew because she valued the strange
things they offered her—friendship, trust, and lessons in
Allomancy—not because she accepted their goals. She would never
have guessed where that would lead her. To balls and parties, to
actually growing—just a bit—to become the noblewoman she
had pretended to be.
But that had been a
farce, a few months of make-believe. She forced her thoughts away
from the frilly clothing and the dances. She needed to focus on
practical matters.
And . . . is
this practical? she thought idly, setting a page in one of the
stacks. Studying things I barely comprehend, fearing a threat
nobody else even cares to notice?
She sighed, folding
her arms under her chin as she lay on her stomach. What was she
really worried about? That the Deepness would return? All she had
were a few phantom visions in the mist—things that could, as
Elend implied, have easily been fabricated by her overworked mind.
More important was another question. Assuming that the Deepness was
real, what did she expect to do about it? She was no hero, general,
or leader.
Oh, Kelsier,
she thought, picking up another page. We could use you now.
Kelsier had been a man beyond convention . . . a man who had somehow
been able to defy reality. He'd thought that by giving his life to
overthrow the Lord Ruler, he would secure freedom for the skaa. But,
what if his sacrifice had opened the way for a greater danger,
something so destructive that the Lord Ruler's oppression was a
preferable alternative?
She finally
finished the page, then placed it in the stack of those that
contained no useful information. Then she paused. She couldn't even
remember what she'd just read. She sighed, picking the page back up,
looking at it again. How did Elend do it? He could study the same
books over and over again. But, for Vin, it was hard to—
She paused. I
must assume that I am not mad, the words said. I cannot, with
any rational sense of confidence, continue my quest if I do not
believe this. The thing following me must, therefore, be real.
She sat up. She
only vaguely remembered this section of the logbook. The book was
organized like a diary, with sequential—but dateless—entries.
It had a tendency to ramble, and the Hero had been fond of droning on
about his insecurities. This section had been particularly dry.
But there, in the
middle of his complaining, was a tidbit of information.
I believe that
it would kill me, if it could, the text continued.
There
is an evil feel to the thing of shadow and fog, and my skin recoils
at its touch. Yet, it seems limited in what it can do, especially to
me.
It
can affect this world, however. The knife it placed in Fedik's chest
proves that much. I'm still not certain which was more traumatic for
him—the wound itself, or seeing the thing that did it to him.
Rashek
whispers that I stabbed Fedik myself, for only Fedik and I can give
witness to that night's events. However, I must make a decision. I
must determine that I am not mad. The alternative is to admit that it
was I who held that knife.
Somehow,
knowing Rashek's opinion on the matter makes it much easier for me to
believe the opposite.
The next page
continued on about Rashek, and the next several entries contained no
mention of the mist spirit. However, Vin found even these few
paragraphs exciting.
He made a
decision, she thought. I have to make the same one. She'd
never worried that she was mad, but she had sensed some logic in
Elend's words. Now she rejected them. The mist spirit was not some
delusion brought on by a mixture of stress and memories of the
logbook. It was real.
That didn't mean
the Deepness was returning, nor did it mean that Luthadel was in any
sort of supernatural danger. Both, however, were possibilities.
She set this page
with the two others that contained concrete information about the
mist spirit, then turned back to her studies, determined to pay
closer attention to her reading.
The armies were
digging in.
Elend watched from
atop the wall as his plan, vague though it was, began to take form.
Straff was making a defensive perimeter to the north, holding the
canal route back a relatively short distance to Urteau, his home city
and capital. Cett was digging in to the west of the city, holding the
Luth-Davn Canal, which ran back to his cannery in Haverfrex.
A cannery. That was
something Elend wished he had in the city. The technology was
newer—perhaps fifty years old—but he'd read of it. The
scholars had considered its main use that of providing easily carried
supplies for soldiers fighting at the fringes of the empire. They
hadn't considered stockpiles for sieges—particularly in
Luthadel. But, then, who would have?
Even as Elend
watched, patrols began to move out from the separate armies. Some
moved to watch the boundaries between the two forces, but others
moved to secure other canal routes, bridges across the River
Channerel, and roads leading away from Luthadel. In a remarkably
short time, the city felt completely surrounded. Cut off from the
world, and the rest of Elend's small kingdom. No more moving in or
out. The armies were counting on disease, starvation, and other
weakening factors to bring Elend to his knees.
The siege of
Luthadel had begun.
That's a good
thing, he told himself. For this plan to work, they have to
think me desperate. They have to be so sure that I'm willing to side
with them, that they don't consider that I might be working with
their enemies, too.
As Elend watched,
he noticed someone climbing up the steps to the wall. Clubs. The
general hobbled over to Elend, who had been standing alone.
"Congratulations," Clubs said. "Looks like you now
have a full-blown siege on your hands."
"Good."
"It'll give us
a little breathing room, I guess," Clubs said. Then he eyed
Elend with one of his gnarled looks. "You'd better be up to
this, kid."
"I know,"
Elend whispered.
"You've made
yourself the focal point," Clubs said. "The Assembly can't
break this siege until you meet officially with Straff, and the kings
aren't likely to meet with anyone on the crew other than yourself.
This is all about you. Useful place for a king to be, I suppose. If
he's a good one."
Clubs fell silent.
Elend stood, looking out over the separate armies. The words spoken
to him by Tindwyl the Terriswoman still bothered him. You are a
fool, Elend Venture . . . .
So far, neither of
the kings had responded to Elend's requests for a meeting—though
the crew was sure that they soon would. His enemies would wait, to
make Elend sweat a bit. The Assembly had just called another meeting,
probably to try and bully him into releasing them from their earlier
proposal. Elend had found a convenient reason to skip the meeting.
He looked at Clubs.
"And am I a good king, Clubs? In your opinion."
The general glanced
at him, and Elend saw a harsh wisdom in his eyes. "I've known
worse leaders," he said. "But I've also known a hell
of a lot better."
Elend nodded
slowly. "I want to be good at this, Clubs. Nobody else is going
to look after the skaa like they deserve. Cett, Straff. They'd just
make slaves of the people again. I . . . I want to be more than my
ideas, though. I want to—need to—be a man that
others can look to."
Clubs shrugged. "My
experience has been that the man is usually made by the situation.
Kelsier was a selfish dandy until the Pits nearly broke him." He
glanced at Elend. "Will this siege be your Pits of
Hathsin, Elend Venture?"
"I don't
know," he said honestly.
"Then we'll
have to wait and see, I guess. For now, someone wants to speak with
you." He turned, nodding down toward the street some forty feet
below, where a tall, feminine figure stood in colorful Terris robes.
"She told me
to send you down," Clubs said. He paused, then glanced at Elend.
"It isn't often you meet someone who feels like they can order
me around. And a Terriswoman at that. I thought those Terris were all
docile and kindly."
Elend smiled. "I
guess Sazed spoiled us."
Clubs snorted. "So
much for a thousand years of breeding, eh?"
Elend nodded.
"You sure
she's safe?" Clubs asked.
"Yes,"
Elend said. "Her story checks out—Vin brought in several
of the Terris people from the city, and they knew and recognized
Tindwyl. She's apparently a fairly important person back in her
homeland."
Plus, she had
performed Feruchemy for him, growing stronger to free her hands. That
meant she wasn't a kandra. All of it together meant that she was
trustworthy enough; even Vin admitted that, even if she continued to
dislike the Terriswoman.
Clubs nodded to
him, and Elend took a deep breath. Then he walked down the stairs to
meet Tindwyl for another round of lessons.
"Today, we
will do something about your clothing," Tindwyl said, closing
the door to Elend's study. A plump seamstress with bowl-cut white
hair waited inside, standing respectfully with a group of youthful
assistants.
Elend glanced down
at his clothing. It actually wasn't bad. The suit coat and vest fit
fairly well. The trousers weren't as stiff as those favored by
imperial nobility, but he was the king now; shouldn't he be able to
set the trends?
"I don't see
what's wrong with it," he said. He held up a hand as Tindwyl
began to speak. "I know it's not quite as formal as what other
men like to wear, but it suits me."
"It's
disgraceful," Tindwyl said.
"Now, I hardly
see—"
"Don't argue
with me."
"But, see, the
other day you said that—"
"Kings don't
argue, Elend Venture," Tindwyl said firmly. "They command.
And, part of your ability to command comes from your bearing.
Slovenly clothing invites other slovenly habits—such as your
posture, which I've already mentioned, I believe."
Elend sighed,
rolling his eyes as Tindwyl snapped her fingers. The seamstress and
her assistants started unpacking a pair of large trunks.
"This isn't
necessary," Elend said. "I already have some suits that fit
more snugly; I wear them on formal occasions."
"You're not
going to wear suits anymore," Tindwyl said.
"Excuse me?"
Tindwyl eyed him
with a commanding stare, and Elend sighed.
"Explain
yourself!" he said, trying to sound commanding.
Tindwyl nodded.
"You have maintained the dress code preferred by the nobility
sanctioned by the Final Emperor. In some respects, this was a good
idea—it gave you a connection to the former government, and
made you seem less of a deviant. Now, however, you are in a different
position. Your people are in danger, and the time for simple
diplomacy is over. You are at war. Your dress should reflect that."
The seamstress
selected a particular costume, then brought it over to Elend while
the assistants set up a changing screen.
Elend hesitantly
accepted the costume. It was stiff and white, and the front of the
jacket appeared to button all the way up to a rigid collar. All and
all, it looked like . . .
"A uniform,"
he said, frowning.
"Indeed,"
Tindwyl said. "You want your people to believe that you can
protect them? Well, a king isn't simply a lawmaker—he's a
general. It is time you began to act like you deserve your title,
Elend Venture."
"I'm no
warrior," Elend said. "This uniform is a lie."
"The first
point we will soon change," Tindwyl said. "The second is
not true. You command the armies of the Central Dominance. That makes
you a military man whether or not you know how to swing a sword. Now,
go change."
Elend acceded with
a shrug. He walked around the changing screen, pushed aside a stack
of books to make room, then began to change. The white trousers fit
snugly and fell straight around the calves. While there was a shirt,
it was completely obscured by the large, stiff jacket—which had
military shoulder fittings. It had an array of buttons—all of
which, he noticed, were wood instead of metal—as well as a
strange shieldlike design over the right breast. It seemed to have
some sort of arrow, or perhaps spear, emblazoned in it.
Stiffness, cut, and
design considered, Elend was surprised how well the uniform fit.
"It's sized quite well," he noted, putting on the belt,
then pulling down the bottom of the jacket, which came all the way to
his hips.
"We got your
measurements from your tailor," Tindwyl said.
Elend stepped
around the changing screen, and several assistants approached. One
politely motioned for him to step into a pair of shiny black boots,
and the other attached a white cape to fastenings at his shoulders.
The final assistant handed him a polished hardwood dueling cane and
sheath. Elend hooked it onto the belt, then pulled it through a slit
in the jacket so it hung outside; that much, at least, he had done
before.
"Good,"
Tindwyl said, looking him up and down. "Once you learn to stand
up straight, that will be a decent improvement. Now, sit."
Elend opened his
mouth to object, but thought better of it. He sat down, and an
assistant approached to attach a sheet around his shoulders. She then
pulled out a pair of shears.
"Now, wait,"
Elend said. "I see where this is going."
"Then voice an
objection," Tindwyl said. "Don't be vague!"
"All right,
then," Elend said. "I like my hair."
"Short hair is
easier to care for than long hair," Tindwyl said. "And you
have proven that you cannot be trusted in the area of personal
grooming."
"You aren't
cutting my hair," Elend said firmly.
Tindwyl paused,
then nodded. The apprentice backed away, and Elend stood, pulling off
the sheet. The seamstress produced a large mirror, and Elend walked
forward to inspect himself.
And froze.
The difference was
surprising. All his life, he'd seen himself as a scholar and
socialite, but also as just a bit of a fool. He was Elend—the
friendly, comfortable man with the funny ideas. Easy to dismiss,
perhaps, but difficult to hate.
The man he saw now
was no dandy of the court. He was a serious man—a formal man. A
man to be taken seriously. The uniform made him want to stand up
straighter, to rest one hand on the dueling cane. His hair—slightly
curled, long on the top and sides, and blown loose by the wind atop
the city wall—didn't fit.
Elend turned. "All
right," he said. "Cut it."
Tindwyl smiled,
then nodded for him to sit. He did so, waiting quietly while the
assistant worked. When he stood again, his head matched the suit. It
wasn't extremely short, not like Ham's hair, but it was neat and
precise. One of the assistants approached and handed him a loop of
silver-painted wood. He turned to Tindwyl, frowning.
"A crown?"
he asked.
"Nothing
ostentatious," Tindwyl said. "This is a more subtle era
than some of those gone by. The crown isn't a symbol of your wealth,
but of your authority. You will wear it from now on, whether you are
in private or in public."
"The Lord
Ruler didn't wear a crown."
"The Lord
Ruler didn't need to remind people that he was in charge,"
Tindwyl said.
Elend paused, then
slipped on the crown. It bore no gemstones or ornamentation; it was
just a simple coronet. As he might have expected, it fit perfectly.
He turned back
toward Tindwyl, who waved for the seamstress to pack up and leave.
"You have six uniforms like this one waiting for you in your
rooms," Tindwyl said. "Until this siege is over, you will
wear nothing else. If you want variety, change the color of the
cape."
Elend nodded.
Behind him, the seamstress and her assistants slipped out the door.
"Thank you," he told Tindwyl. "I was hesitant at
first, but you are right. This makes a difference."
"Enough of one
to deceive people for now, at least," Tindwyl said.
"Deceive
people?"
"Of course.
You didn't think that this was it, did you?"
"Well . . . "
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow. "A few lessons, and you think you're through? We've
barely begun. You are still a fool, Elend Venture—you just
don't look like one anymore. Hopefully, our charade will begin
reversing some of the damage you've done to your reputation. However,
it is going to take a lot more training before I'll actually trust
you to interact with people and not embarrass yourself."
Elend flushed.
"What do you—" He paused. "Tell me what you plan
to teach me, then."
"Well, you
need to learn how to walk, for one thing."
"Something's
wrong with the way I walk?"
"By the
forgotten gods, yes!" Tindwyl said, sounding amused, though no
smile marred her lips. "And your speech patterns still need
work. Beyond that, of course, there is your inability to handle
weapons."
"I've had some
training," Elend said. "Ask Vin—I rescued her from
the Lord Ruler's palace the night of the Collapse!"
"I know,"
Tindwyl said. "And, from what I've heard, it was a miracle you
survived. Fortunately, the girl was there to do the actual fighting.
You apparently rely on her quite a bit for that sort of thing."
"She's
Mistborn."
"That is no
excuse for your slovenly lack of skill," Tindwyl said. "You
cannot always rely on your woman to protect you. Not only is it
embarrassing, but your people—your soldiers—will expect
you to be able to fight with them. I doubt you will ever be the type
of leader who can lead a charge against the enemy, but you should at
least be able to handle yourself if your position gets attacked."
"So, you want
me to begin sparring with Vin and Ham during their training
sessions?"
"Goodness, no!
Can't you imagine how terrible it would be for morale if the men saw
you being beaten up in public?" Tindwyl shook her head. "No,
we'll have you trained discreetly by a dueling master. Given a few
months, we should have you competent with the cane and the sword.
Hopefully, this little siege of yours will last that long before the
fighting starts."
Elend flushed
again. "You keep talking down to me. It's like I'm not even king
in your eyes—like you see me as some kind of placeholder."
Tindwyl didn't
answer, but her eyes glinted with satisfaction. You said it, not
I, her expression seemed to say.
Elend flushed more
deeply.
"You can,
perhaps, learn to be a king, Elend Venture," Tindwyl said.
"Until then, you'll just have to learn to fake it."
Elend's angry
response was cut off by a knock at the door. Elend gritted his teeth,
turning. "Come in."
The door swung
open. "There's news," Captain Demoux said, his youthful
face excited as he entered. "I—" He froze.
Elend cocked his
head. "Yes?"
"I . . . uh .
. . " Demoux paused, looked Elend over again before continuing.
"Ham sent me, Your Majesty. He says that a messenger from one of
the kings has arrived."
"Really?"
Elend said. "From Lord Cett?"
"No, Your
Majesty. The messenger is from your father."
Elend frowned.
"Well, tell Ham I'll be there in a moment."
"Yes, Your
Majesty," Demoux said, retreating. "Uh, I like the new
uniform, Your Majesty."
"Thank you,
Demoux," Elend said. "Do you, by chance, know where Lady
Vin is? I haven't seen her all day."
"I think she's
in her quarters, Your Majesty."
Her quarters?
She never stays there. Is she sick?
"Do you want
me to summon her?" Demoux asked.
"No, thank
you," Elend said. "I'll get her. Tell Ham to make the
messenger comfortable."
Demoux nodded, then
withdrew.
Elend turned to
Tindwyl, who was smiling to herself with a look of satisfaction.
Elend brushed by her, walking over to grab his notebook. "I'm
going to learn to do more than just 'fake' being king, Tindwyl."
"We'll see."
Elend shot a glance
at the middle-aged Terriswoman in her robes and jewelry.
"Practice
expressions like that one," Tindwyl noted, "and you just
might do it."
"Is that all
it is, then?" Elend asked. "Expressions and costumes? Is
that what makes a king?"
"Of course
not."
Elend stopped by
the door, turning back. "Then, what does? What do you
think makes a man a good king, Tindwyl of Terris?"
"Trust,"
Tindwyl said, looking him in the eyes. "A good king is one who
is trusted by his people—and one who deserves that trust."
Elend paused, then
nodded. Good answer, he acknowledged, then pulled open the
door and rushed out to find Vin.
If only the
Terris religion, and belief in the Anticipation, hadn't spread beyond
our people.





17
THE PILES OF PAPER
SEEMED to multiply as Vin found more and more ideas in the logbook
that she wanted to isolate and remember. What were the prophecies
about the Hero of Ages? How did the logbook author know where to go,
and what did he think he'd have to do when he got there?
Eventually, lying
amid the mess—overlapping piles turned in odd directions to
keep them separate—Vin acknowledged a distasteful fact. She was
going to have to take notes.
With a sigh, she
rose and crossed the room, stepping carefully over several stacks and
approaching the room's desk. She'd never used it before; in fact,
she'd complained about it to Elend. What need did she have of a
writing desk?
So she'd thought.
She selected a pen, then pulled out a little jar of ink, remembering
the days when Reen had taught her to write. He'd quickly grown
frustrated with her scratchings, complaining about the cost of ink
and paper. He'd taught her to read so that she could decipher
contracts and imitate a noblewoman, but he'd thought that writing was
less useful. In general, Vin shared this opinion.
Apparently,
however, writing had uses even if one wasn't a scribe. Elend was
always scribbling notes and memos to himself; she'd often been
impressed by how quickly he could write. How did he make the letters
come so easily?
She grabbed a
couple of blank sheets of paper and walked back over to her sorted
piles. She sat down with crossed legs and unscrewed the top of the
ink bottle.
"Mistress,"
OreSeur noted, still lying with his paws before him, "you do
realize that you just left the writing desk behind to sit on the
floor."
Vin looked up.
"And?"
"The purpose
of a writing desk is, well, writing."
"But my papers
are all over here."
"Papers can be
moved, I believe. If they prove too heavy, you could always burn
pewter to give yourself more strength."
Vin eyed his amused
face as she inked the nib of her pen. Well, at least he's
displaying something other than his dislike of me. "The
floor is more comfortable."
"If you say
so, Mistress, I will believe it to be true."
She paused, trying
to determine if he was still mocking her or not. Blasted dog's
face, she thought. Too hard to read.
With a sigh, she
leaned down and began to write out the first word. She had to make
each line precisely so that the ink didn't smudge, and she had to
pause often to sound out words and find the right letters. She'd
barely written a couple of sentences before a knock came at her door.
She looked up with a frown. Who was bothering her?
"Come in,"
she called.
She heard a door
open in the other room, and Elend's voice called out. "Vin?"
"In here,"
she said, turning back to her writing. "Why did you knock?"
"Well, you
might have been changing," he said, entering.
"So?" Vin
asked.
Elend chuckled.
"Two years, and privacy is still a strange concept to you."
Vin looked up.
"Well, I did—"
For just the
briefest flash of a moment, she thought he was someone else. Her
instincts kicked in before her brain, and she reflexively dropped the
pen, jumping up and flaring pewter.
Then she stopped.
"That much of
a change, eh?" Elend asked, holding out his arms so she could
get a better look at his costume.
Vin put a hand to
her chest, so shocked that she stepped right on one of her stacks. It
was Elend, but it wasn't. The brilliant white costume, with its sharp
lines and firm figure, looked so different from his normal loose
jacket and trousers. He seemed more commanding. More regal.
"You cut your
hair," she said, walking around him slowly, studying the
costume.
"Tindwyl's
idea," he said. "What do you think?"
"Less for
people to grab on to in a fight," Vin said.
Elend smiled. "Is
that all you think about?"
"No," Vin
said absently, reaching up to tug his cape. It came free easily, and
she nodded approvingly. Mistcloaks were the same; Elend wouldn't have
to worry about someone grabbing his cape in a fight.
She stepped back,
arms folded. "Does this mean I can cut my hair, too?"
Elend paused just
briefly. "You're always free to do what you want, Vin. But, I
kind of think it's pretty longer."
It stays, then.
"Anyway,"
Elend said. "You approve?"
"Definitely,"
Vin said. "You look like a king." Though, she suspected a
part of her would miss the tangle-haired, disheveled Elend. There had
been something . . . endearing about that mixture of earnest
competence and distracted inattention.
"Good,"
Elend said. "Because I think we're going to need the advantage.
A messenger just . . . " He trailed off, looking over her stacks
of paper. "Vin? Were you doing research?"
Vin flushed. "I
was just looking through the logbook, trying to find references to
the Deepness."
"You were!"
Elend stepped forward excitedly. To her chagrin, he quickly located
the paper with her fledgling notes on it. He held the paper up, then
looked over at her. "Did you write this?"
"Yes,"
she said.
"Your
penmanship is beautiful," he said, sounding a bit surprised.
"Why didn't you tell me you could write like this?"
"Didn't you
say something about a messenger?"
Elend put the sheet
back down, looking oddly like a proud parent. "Right. A
messenger from my father's army has arrived. I'm making him wait for
a bit—it didn't seem wise to appear too eager. But, we should
probably go meet with him."
Vin nodded, waving
to OreSeur. The kandra rose and padded to her side, and the three of
them left her quarters.
That was one nice
thing about books and notes. They could always wait for another time.
They found the
messenger waiting in the third-floor Venture atrium. Vin and Elend
walked in, and she stopped immediately.
It was him.
The Watcher.
Elend stepped
forward to meet the man, and Vin grabbed his arm. "Wait,"
she hissed quietly.
Elend turned,
confused.
If that man has
atium, Vin thought with a stab of panic, Elend is dead. We're
all dead.
The Watcher stood
quietly. He didn't look much like a messenger or courier. He wore all
black, even a pair of black gloves. He wore trousers and a silken
shirt, with no cloak or cape. She remembered that face. It was him.
But . . .
she thought, if he'd wanted to kill Elend, he could have done so
already. The thought frightened her, yet she had to admit it was
true.
"What?"
Elend asked, standing in the doorway with her.
"Be careful,"
she whispered. "This is no simple messenger. That man is
Mistborn."
Elend paused,
frowning. He turned back toward the Watcher, who stood quietly,
clasping his hands behind his back, looking confident. Yes, he was
Mistborn; only a man such as he could walk into an enemy palace,
completely surrounded by guards, and not be the slightest bit
unsettled.
"All right,"
Elend said, finally stepping into the room. "Straff's man. You
bring a message for me?"
"Not just a
message, Your Majesty," the Watcher said. "My name is Zane,
and I am something of an . . . ambassador. Your father was very
pleased to receive your invitation for an alliance. He's glad that
you are finally seeing reason."
Vin studied the
Watcher, this "Zane." What was his game? Why come himself?
Why reveal who he was?
Elend nodded,
keeping a distance from Zane. "Two armies," Elend said,
"camped outside my door . . . well, that's not the kind of thing
I can ignore. I'd like to meet with my father and discuss
possibilities for the future."
"I think he
would enjoy that," Zane said. "It has been some time since
he saw you, and he has long regretted your falling-out. You are,
after all, his only son."
"It's been
hard on both of us," Elend said. "Perhaps we could set up a
tent in which to meet outside the city?"
"I'm afraid
that won't be possible," Zane said. "His Majesty rightly
fears assassins. If you wish to speak with him, he'd be happy to host
you at his tent in the Venture camp."
Elend frowned.
"Now, I don't think that makes much sense. If he fears
assassins, shouldn't I?"
"I'm certain
he could protect you in his own camp, Your Majesty," Zane said.
"You have nothing to fear from Cett's assassins there."
"I . . . see,"
Elend said.
"I'm afraid
that His Majesty was quite firm on this point," Zane said. "You
are the one who is eager for an alliance—if you wish a meeting,
you will have to come to him."
Elend glanced at
Vin. She continued to watch Zane. The man met her eyes, and spoke. "I
have heard reports of the beautiful Mistborn who accompanies the
Venture heir. She who slew the Lord Ruler, and was trained by the
Survivor himself."
There was silence
in the room for a moment.
Elend finally
spoke. "Tell my father that I will consider his offer."
Zane finally turned
away from Vin. "His Majesty was hoping for us to set a date and
time, Your Majesty."
"I will send
another message when I have made my decision," Elend said.
"Very well,"
Zane said, bowing slightly, though he used the move to catch Vin's
eyes once again. Then he nodded once to Elend, and let the guards
escort him away.
In the cold mist of
early evening, Vin waited on the short wall of Keep Venture, OreSeur
sitting at her side.
The mists were
quiet. Her thoughts were far less serene.
Who else would
he work for? she thought. Of course he's one of Straff's men.
That explained many
things. It had been quite a while since their last encounter; Vin had
begun to think that she wouldn't see the Watcher again.
Would they spar
again, then? Vin tried to suppress her eagerness, tried to tell
herself that she simply wanted to find this Watcher because of the
threat he posed. But, the thrill of another fight in the
mists—another chance to test her abilities against a
Mistborn—made her tense with anticipation.
She didn't know
him, and she certainly didn't trust him. That only made the prospect
of a fight all the more exciting.
"Why are we
waiting here, Mistress?" OreSeur asked.
"We're just on
patrol," Vin said. "Watching for assassins or spies. Just
like every night."
"Do you
command me to believe you, Mistress?"
Vin shot him a flat
stare. "Believe as you wish, kandra."
"Very well,"
OreSeur said. "Why did you not tell the king that you've been
sparring with this Zane?"
Vin turned back
toward the dark mists. "Assassins and Allomancers are my
concern, not Elend's. No need to worry him yet—he has enough
troubles at the moment."
OreSeur sat back on
his haunches. "I see."
"You don't
believe I'm right?"
"I believe as
I wish," OreSeur said. "Isn't that what you just commanded
me, Mistress?"
"Whatever,"
Vin said. Her bronze was on, and she had to try very hard not to
think about the mist spirit. She could feel it waiting in the
darkness to her right. She didn't look toward it.
The logbook
never did mention what became of that spirit. It nearly killed one of
the Hero's companions. After that, there was barely a mention of it.
Problems for
another night, she thought as another source of Allomancy
appeared to her bronze senses. A stronger, more familiar source.
Zane.
Vin hopped up onto
the battlements, nodded farewell to OreSeur, then jumped out into the
night.
Mist twisted in the
sky, different breezes forming silent streams of white, like rivers
in the air. Vin skimmed them, burst through them, and rode them like
a bouncing stone cast upon the waters. She quickly reached the place
where she and Zane had last parted, the lonely abandoned street.
He waited in the
center, still wearing black. Vin dropped to the cobbles before him in
a flurry of mistcloak tassels. She stood up straight.
He never wears a
cloak. Why is that?
The two stood
opposite one another for a few silent moments. Zane had to know of
her questions, but he offered no introduction, greeting, or
explanation. Eventually, he reached into a pocket and pulled out a
coin. He tossed it to the street between them, and it bounced—metal
ringing against stone—and came to a stop.
He jumped into the
air. Vin did likewise, both Pushing against the coin. Their separate
weights nearly canceled each other out, and they shot up and back,
like the two arms of a "V."
Zane spun, throwing
a coin behind him. It slammed against the side of a building and he
Pushed, throwing himself toward Vin. Suddenly, she felt a force slam
against her coin pouch, threatening to toss her back down to the
ground.
What is the game
tonight, Zane? she thought even as she yanked the tie on her
pouch, dropping it free from her belt. She Pushed against it, and it
shot downward, forced by her weight. When it hit the ground, Vin had
the better upward force: she was Pushing against the pouch from
directly above, while Zane was only pushing from the side. Vin
lurched upward, streaking past Zane in the cool night air, then threw
her weight against the coins in his own pocket.
Zane began to drop.
However, he grabbed the coins—keeping them from ripping
free—and Pushed down on her pouch. He froze in the air—Vin
Pushing him from above, his own Push forcing him upward. And, because
he stopped, Vin's Push suddenly threw her backward.
Vin let go of Zane
and allowed herself to drop. Zane, however, didn't let himself fall.
He Pushed himself back up into the air, then began to bound away,
never letting his feet touch rooftops or cobblestones.
He tried to
force me to the ground, Vin thought. First one to fall loses,
is that it? Still tumbling, Vin spun herself in the air. She
retrieved her coin pouch with a careful Pull, then threw it down
toward the ground and Pushed herself upward.
She Pulled the
pouch back into her hand even as she flew, then jumped after Zane,
Pushing recklessly through the night, trying to catch up. In the
darkness, Luthadel seemed cleaner than it did during the day. She
couldn't see the ash-stained buildings, the dark refineries, the haze
of smoke from the forges. Around her, the empty keeps of the old high
nobility watched like silent monoliths. Some of the majestic
buildings had been given to lesser nobles, and others had become
government buildings. The rest—after being plundered at Elend's
command—lay unused, their stained-glass windows dark, their
vaultings, statues, and murals ignored.
Vin wasn't certain
if Zane purposely headed to Keep Hasting, or if she simply caught up
to him there. Either way, the enormous structure loomed as Zane
noticed her proximity and turned, throwing a handful of coins at her.
Vin Pushed against
them tentatively. Sure enough, as soon as she touched them, Zane
flared steel and Pushed harder. If she'd been Pushing hard, the force
of his attack would have thrown her backward. As it was, she was able
to deflect the coins to her sides.
Zane immediately
Pushed against her coin pouch again, throwing himself upward along
one of Keep Hasting's walls. Vin was ready for this move as well.
Flaring pewter, she grabbed the pouch in a two-handed grip and ripped
it in half.
Coins sprayed
beneath her, shooting toward the ground under the force of Zane's
Push. She selected one and Pushed herself, gaining lift as soon as it
hit the ground. She spun, facing upward, her tin-enhanced ears
hearing a shower of metal hit the stones far below. She'd still have
access to the coins, but she didn't have to carry them on her body.
She shot up toward
Zane, one of the keep's outer towers looming in the mists to her
left. Keep Hasting was one of the finest in the city. It had a large
tower at the center—tall, imposing, wide—with a ballroom
at the very top. It also had six smaller towers rising equidistant
around the central structure, each one connected to it by a thick
wall. It was an elegant, majestic building. Somehow, she suspected
that Zane had sought it out for that reason.
Vin watched him
now, his Push losing power as he got too far from the coin anchor
below. He spun directly above her, a dark figure against a shifting
sky of mist, still well below the top of the wall. Vin yanked sharply
on several coins below, Pulling them into the air in case she needed
them.
Zane plummeted
toward her. Vin reflexively Pushed against the coins in his pocket,
then realized that was probably what he'd wanted: it gave him lift
while forcing her down. She let go as she fell, and she soon passed
the group of coins she'd Pulled into the air. She Pulled on one,
bringing it into her hand, then Pushed on another, sending it
sideways into the wall.
Vin shot to the
side. Zane whooshed by her in the air, his passing churning the
mists. He soon bobbed back up—probably using a coin from
below—and flung a double handful of coins straight at her.
Vin spun, again
deflecting the coins. They shot around her, and she heard several
pling against something in the mists behind her. Another wall.
She and Zane were sparring between a pair of the keep's outer towers;
there was an angled wall to either side of them, with the central
tower just a short distance in front of them. They were fighting near
the tip of an open-bottomed triangle of stone walls.
Zane shot toward
her. Vin reached out to throw her weight against him, but realized
with a start that he was no longer carrying any coins. He was Pushing
on something behind him, though—the same coin Vin had slammed
against the wall with her weight. She Pushed herself upward, trying
to get out of the way, but he angled upward as well.
Zane crashed into
her, and they began to fall. As they spun together, Zane grabbed her
by the upper arms, holding his face close to hers. He didn't seem
angry, or even very forceful.
He just seemed
calm.
"This is what
we are, Vin," he said quietly. Wind and mist whipped around them
as they fell, the tassels of Vin's mistcloak writhing in the air
around Zane. "Why do you play their games? Why do you let them
control you?"
Vin placed her hand
lightly against Zane's chest, then Pushed on the coin that had been
in her palm. The force of the Push lurched her free of his grip,
flipping him up and backward. She caught herself just a few feet from
the ground, Pushing against fallen coins, throwing herself upward
again.
She passed Zane in
the night, and saw a smile on his face as he fell. Vin reached
downward, locking on to the blue lines extending toward the ground
far below, then flared iron and Pulled against all of them at once.
Blue lines zipped around her, the coins rising and rising shooting
past the surprised Zane.
She Pulled a few
choice coins into her hands. Let's see if you can stay in the air
now, Vin thought with a smile, Pushing outward, spraying the
other coins away into the night. Zane continued to fall.
Vin began to fall
as well. She threw a coin to each side, then Pushed. The coins shot
into the mists, flying toward the stone walls to either side. Coins
slapped against stone, and Vin lurched to a halt in the air.
She Pushed hard,
holding herself in place, anticipating a Pull from below. If he
pulls, I Pull, too, she thought. We both fall, and I keep the
coins between us in the air. He'll hit the ground first.
A coin shot past
her in the air.
What! Where did
he get that! She'd been sure that she'd Pushed away every coin
below.
The coin arced
upward, through the mists, trailing a blue line visible to her
Allomancer's eyes. It crested the top of the wall to her right. Vin
glanced down just in time to see Zane slow, then lurch upward—Pulling
on the coin that was now held in place atop the wall by the stone
railing.
He passed her with
a self-satisfied look on his face.
Show-off.
Vin let go of the
coin to her left while still Pushing to her right. She lurched to the
left, nearly colliding with the wall before she threw another coin at
it. She Pushed on this one, throwing herself upward and to the right.
Another coin sent her back upward to the left, and she continued to
bounce between the walls, back and forth, until she crested the top.
She smiled as she
twisted in the air. Zane—hovering in the air above the wall's
top—nodded appreciatively as she passed. She noticed that he'd
grabbed a few of her discarded coins.
Time for a
little attack myself, Vin thought.
She slammed a Push
against the coins in Zane's hand, and they shot her upward. However,
Zane was still Pushing against the coin on the wall top below, and so
he didn't fall. Instead he hung in the air between the two forces—his
own Push forcing him upward, Vin's Push forcing him downward.
Vin heard him grunt
in exertion, and she Pushed harder. She was so focused, however, that
she barely saw him open his other hand and Push a coin up toward her.
She reached out to Push against it, but fortunately his aim was off,
and the coin missed her by a few inches.
Or perhaps it
didn't. Immediately, the coin zipped back downward and hit her in the
back. Zane Pulled on it forcefully, and the bit of metal dug into
Vin's skin. She gasped, flaring pewter to keep the coin from cutting
through her.
Zane didn't relent.
Vin gritted her teeth, but he weighed much more than she did. She
inched down toward him in the night, her Push straining to keep the
two of them apart, the coin digging painfully into her back.
Never get into a
raw Pushing match, Vin, Kelsier had warned her. You don't
weigh enough—you'll lose every time.
She stopped Pushing
on the coin in Zane's hand. Immediately, she fell, Pulled by the coin
on her back. She Pushed on it slightly, giving herself a little
leverage, then threw her final coin to the side. It hit at the last
moment, and Vin's Push scooted her out from between Zane and his
coin.
Zane's coin snapped
him in the chest, and he grunted: he had obviously been trying to get
Vin to collide with him again. Vin smiled, then Pulled against the
coin in Zane's hand.
Give him what he
wants, I guess.
He turned just in
time to see her slam feet-first into him. Vin spun, feeling him
crumple beneath her. She exulted in the victory, spinning in the air
above the wall walk. Then she noticed something: several faint lines
of blue disappearing into the distance. Zane had pushed all of their
coins away.
Desperately, Vin
grabbed one of the coins and Pulled it back. Too late, however. She
searched frantically for a closer source of metal, but all was stone
or wood. Disoriented, she hit the stone wall walk, tumbling amid her
mistcloak until she came to a halt beside the wall's stone railing.
She shook her head
and flared tin, clearing her vision with a flash of pain and other
senses. Surely Zane hadn't fared better. He must have fallen as—
Zane hung a few
feet away. He'd found a coin—Vin couldn't fathom how—and
was Pushing against it below him. However, he didn't shoot away. He
hovered above the wall top, just a few feet in the air, still in a
half tumble from Vin's kick.
As Vin watched,
Zane rotated slowly in the air, hand outstretched beneath him,
twisting like a skilled acrobat on a pole. There was a look of
intense concentration on his face, and his muscles—all of them,
arms, face, chest—were taut. He turned in the air until he was
facing her.
Vin watched with
awe. It was possible to Push just slightly against a coin, regulating
the amount of force with which one was thrown backward. It was
incredibly difficult, however—so difficult that even Kelsier
had struggled with it. Most of the time, Mistborn simply used short
bursts. When Vin fell, for instance, she slowed herself by throwing a
coin and Pushing against it briefly—but powerfully—to
counteract her momentum.
She'd never seen an
Allomancer with as much control as Zane. His ability to push slightly
against that coin would be of little use in a fight; it obviously
took too much concentration. Yet, there was a grace to it, a beauty
to his movements that implied something Vin herself had felt.
Allomancy wasn't
just about fighting and killing. It was about skill and grace. It was
something beautiful.
Zane rotated until
he was upright, standing in a gentleman's posture. Then he dropped to
the wall walk, his feet slapping quietly against the stones. He
regarded Vin—who still lay on the stones—with a look that
lacked contempt.
"You are very
skilled," he said. "And quite powerful."
He was tall,
impressive. Like . . . Kelsier. "Why did you come to the
palace today?" she asked, climbing to her feet.
"To see how
they treated you. Tell me, Vin. What is it about Mistborn that makes
us—despite our powers—so willing to act as slaves to
others?"
"Slaves?"
Vin said. "I'm no slave."
Zane shook his
head. "They use you, Vin."
"Sometimes
it's good to be useful."
"Those words
are spoken of insecurity."
Vin paused; then
she eyed him. "Where did you get that coin, at the end? There
were none nearby."
Zane smiled, then
opened his mouth and pulled out a coin. He dropped it to the stones
with a pling. Vin opened her eyes wide. Metal inside a
person's body can't be affected by another Allomancer. . . . That's
such an easy trick! Why didn't I think of it?
Why didn't
Kelsier think of it?
Zane shook his
head. "We don't belong with them, Vin. We don't belong in their
world. We belong here, in the mists."
"I belong with
those who love me," Vin said.
"Love you?"
Zane asked quietly. "Tell me. Do they understand you, Vin? Can
they understand you? And, can a man love something he doesn't
understand?"
He watched her for
a moment. When she didn't respond, he nodded to her slightly, then
Pushed against the coin he had dropped moments before, throwing
himself back into the mists.
Vin let him go. His
words held more weight than he probably understood. We don't
belong in their world. . . . He couldn't know that she'd been
pondering her place, wondering whether she was noblewoman, assassin,
or something else.
Zane's words, then,
meant something important. He felt himself to be an outsider. A
little like herself. It was a weakness in him, certainly. Perhaps she
could turn him against Straff—his willingness to spar with her,
his willingness to reveal himself, hinted at that much.
She breathed in
deeply of the cool, mist air, her heart still beating quickly from
the exchange. She felt tired, yet alive, from fighting someone who
might actually be better than she was. Standing in the mists atop the
wall of an abandoned keep, she decided something.
She had to keep
sparring with Zane.
If only the
Deepness hadn't come when it did, providing a threat that drove men
to desperation both in action and belief.





18
"KILL HIM,"
GOD WHISPERED.
Zane hung quietly
in the mists, looking through Elend Venture's open balcony doors. The
mists swirled around him, obscuring him from the king's view.
"You should
kill him," God said again.
In a way, Zane
hated Elend, though he had never met the man before today. Elend was
everything that Zane should have been. Favored. Privileged. Pampered.
He was Zane's enemy, a block in the road to domination, the thing
that was keeping Straff—and therefore Zane—from ruling
the Central Dominance.
But he was also
Zane's brother.
Zane let himself
drop through the mists, falling silently to the ground outside Keep
Venture. He Pulled his anchors up into his hand—three small
bars he had been pushing on to hold himself in place. Vin would be
returning soon, and he didn't want to be near the keep when she did.
She had a strange ability to know where he was; her senses were far
more keen than any Allomancer he had ever known or fought. Of course,
she had been trained by the Survivor himself.
I would have
liked to have known him, Zane thought as he moved quietly across
the courtyard. He was a man who understood the power of being
Mistborn. A man who didn't let others control him.
A man who did
what had to be done, no matter how ruthless it seemed. Or so the
rumors said.
Zane paused beside
the outer keep wall, below a buttress. He stooped, removing a
cobblestone, and found the message left there by his spy inside
Elend's palace. Zane retrieved it, replaced the cobblestone, then
dropped a coin and launched himself out into the night.
Zane did not slink.
Nor did he creep, skulk, or cower. In fact, he didn't even like to
hide.
So, he approached
the Venture army camp with a determined stride. It seemed to him that
Mistborn spent too much of their existence hiding. True, anonymity
offered some limited freedom. However, his experience had been that
it bound them more than it freed them. It let them be controlled, and
it let society pretend that they didn't exist.
Zane strode toward
a guard post, where two soldiers sat beside a large fire. He shook
his head; they were virtually useless, blinded by the firelight.
Normal men feared the mists, and that made them less valuable. That
wasn't arrogance; it was a simple fact. Allomancers were more useful,
and therefore more valuable, than normal men. That was why Zane had
Tineyes watching in the darkness as well. These regular soldiers were
more a formality than anything else.
"Kill them,"
God commanded as Zane walked up to the guard post. Zane ignored the
voice, though it was growing more and more difficult to do so.
"Halt!"
one of the guards said, lowering a spear. "Who is that?"
Zane Pushed the
spear offhandedly, flipping up the tip. "Who else would it be?"
he snapped, walking into the firelight.
"Lord Zane!"
the other soldier said.
"Summon the
king," Zane said, passing the guard post. "Tell him to meet
me in the command tent."
"But, my
lord," the guard said. "The hour is late. His Majesty is
probably . . . "
Zane turned, giving
the guard a flat stare. The mists swirled between them. Zane didn't
even have to use emotional Allomancy on the soldier; the man simply
saluted, then rushed off into the night to do as commanded.
Zane strode through
the camp. He wore no uniform or mistcloak, but soldiers stopped and
saluted as he passed. This was the way it should be. They knew
him, knew what he was, knew to respect him.
And yet, a part of
him acknowledged that if Straff hadn't kept his bastard son hidden,
Zane might not be the powerful weapon that he was today. That secrecy
had forced Zane to live a life of near squalor while his half
brother, Elend, had been privileged. But it also meant that Straff
had been able to keep Zane hidden for most of his life. Even still,
while rumors were growing about the existence of Straff's Mistborn,
few realized that Zane was Straff's son.
Plus, living a
harsh life had taught Zane to survive on his own. He had become hard,
and powerful. Things he suspected Elend would never understand.
Unfortunately, one side effect of his childhood was that it had
apparently driven him mad.
"Kill him,"
God whispered as Zane passed another guard. The voice spoke every
time he saw a person—it was Zane's quiet, constant companion.
He understood that he was insane. It hadn't really been all that hard
to determine, all things considered. Normal people did not hear
voices. Zane did.
He found insanity
no excuse, however, for irrational behavior. Some men were blind,
others had poor tempers. Still others heard voices. It was all the
same, in the end. A man was defined not by his flaws, but by how he
overcame them.
And so, Zane
ignored the voice. He killed when he wanted to, not when it
commanded. In his estimation, he was actually quite lucky. Other
madmen saw visions, or couldn't distinguish their delusions from
reality. Zane, at least, could control himself.
For the most part.
He Pushed on the
metal clasps on the flaps of the command tent. The flaps flipped
backward, opening for him as the soldiers to either side saluted.
Zane ducked inside.
"My lord!"
said the nightwatch officer of command.
"Kill him,"
God said. "He's really not that important."
"Paper,"
Zane ordered, walking to the room's large table. The officer
scrambled to comply, grabbing a stack of sheets. Zane Pulled on the
nib of a pen, flipping it across the room to his waiting hand. The
officer brought the ink.
"These are
troop concentrations and night patrols," Zane said, scribbling
down some numbers and diagrams on the paper. "I observed them
tonight, while I was in Luthadel."
"Very good, my
lord," the soldier said. "We appreciate your help."
Zane paused. Then
he slowly continued to write. "Soldier, you are not my superior.
You aren't even my equal. I am not 'helping' you. I am seeing to the
needs of my army. Do you understand?"
"Of course, my
lord."
"Good,"
Zane said, finishing his notes and handing the paper to the soldier.
"Now, leave—or I'll do as a friend has suggested and ram
this pen through your throat."
The soldier
accepted the paper, then quickly withdrew. Zane waited impatiently.
Straff did not arrive. Finally, Zane cursed quietly and Pushed open
the tent flaps and strode out. Straff's tent was a blazing red beacon
in the night, well lit by numerous lanterns. Zane passed the guards,
who knew better than to bother him, and entered the king's tent.
Straff was having a
late dinner. He was a tall man, brown of hair like both his sons—the
two important ones, at least. He had fine nobleman's hands, which he
used to eat with finesse. He didn't react as Zane entered.
"You're late,"
Straff said.
"Kill him,"
God said.
Zane clinched his
fists. This command from the voice was the hardest to ignore. "Yes,"
he said. "I'm late."
"What happened
tonight?" Straff asked.
Zane glanced at the
servants. "We should do this in the command tent."
Straff continued to
sip his soup, staying where he was, implying that Zane had no power
to order him about. It was frustrating, but not unexpected. Zane had
used virtually the same tactic on the nightwatch officer just moments
before. He had learned from the best.
Finally, Zane
sighed, taking a seat. He rested his arms on the table, idly spinning
a dinner knife as he watched his father eat. A servant approached to
ask Zane if he wanted a meal, but he waved the man away.
"Kill Straff,"
God commanded. "You should be in his place. You are stronger
than he is. You are more competent."
But I'm not as
sane, Zane thought.
"Well?"
Straff asked. "Do they have the Lord Ruler's atium or not?"
"I'm not
sure," Zane said.
"Does the girl
trust you?" Straff asked.
"She's
beginning to," Zane said. "I did see her use atium, that
once, fighting Cett's assassins."
Straff nodded
thoughtfully. He really was competent; because of him, the Northern
Dominance had avoided the chaos that prevailed in the rest of the
Final Empire. Straff's skaa remained under control, his noblemen
quelled. True, he had been forced to execute a number of people to
prove that he was in charge. But, he did what needed to be done. That
was one attribute in a man that Zane respected above all others.
Especially since he
had trouble displaying it himself.
"Kill him!"
God yelled. "You hate him! He kept you in squalor, forcing you
to fight for your survival as a child."
He made me
strong, Zane thought.
"Then use that
strength to kill him!"
Zane grabbed the
carving knife off the table. Straff looked up from his meal, then
flinched just slightly as Zane sliced the flesh of his own arm. He
cut a long gash into the top of his forearm, drawing blood. The pain
helped him resist the voice.
Straff watched for
a moment, then waved for a servant to bring Zane a towel so he
wouldn't get blood on the rug.
"You need to
get her to use atium again," Straff said. "Elend may have
been able to gather one or two beads. We'll only know the truth if
she runs out." He paused, turning back to his meal. "Actually,
what you need to do is get her to tell you where the stash is hidden,
if they even have it."
Zane sat, watching
the blood seep from the gash on his forearm. "She's more capable
than you think, Father."
Straff raised an
eyebrow. "Don't tell me you believe those stories, Zane? The
lies about her and the Lord Ruler?"
"How do you
know they are lies?"
"Because of
Elend," Straff said. "That boy is a fool; he only controls
Luthadel because every nobleman with half a wit in his head fled the
city. If that girl were powerful enough to defeat the Lord Ruler, I
sincerely doubt that your brother could ever have gained her
loyalty."
Zane cut another
slice in his arm. He didn't cut deeply enough to do any real damage,
and the pain worked as it usually did. Straff finally turned from his
meal, masking a look of discomfort. A small, twisted piece of Zane
took pleasure from seeing that look in his father's eyes. Perhaps it
was a side effect of his insanity.
"Anyway,"
Straff said, "did you meet with Elend?"
Zane nodded. He
turned to a serving girl. "Tea," he said, waving his uncut
arm. "Elend was surprised. He wanted to meet with you, but he
obviously didn't like the idea of coming into your camp. I doubt
he'll come."
"Perhaps,"
Straff said. "But, don't underestimate the boy's foolishness.
Either way, perhaps now he understands how our relationship will
proceed."
So much
posturing, Zane thought. By sending this message, Straff took a
stand: he wouldn't be ordered about, or even inconvenienced, on
Elend's behalf.
Being forced
into a siege inconvenienced you, though, Zane thought with a
smile. What Straff would have liked to do was attack directly, taking
the city without parlay or negotiations. The arrival of the second
army made that impossible. Attack now, and Straff would be defeated
by Cett.
That meant waiting,
waiting in a siege, until Elend saw reason and joined with his father
willingly. But, waiting was something Straff disliked. Zane didn't
mind as much. It would give him more time to spar with the girl. He
smiled.
As the tea arrived,
Zane closed his eyes, then burned tin to enhance his senses. His
wounds burst to life, minor pains becoming great, shocking him to
wakefulness.
There was a part of
all this he wasn't telling Straff. She is coming to trust me,
he thought. And there's something else about her. She's like me.
Perhaps . . . she could understand me.
Perhaps she
could save me.
He sighed, opening
his eyes and using the towel to clean his arm. His insanity
frightened him sometimes. But, it seemed weaker around Vin. That was
all he had to go on for the moment. He accepted his tea from the
serving girl—long braid, firm chest, homely features—and
took a sip of the hot cinnamon.
Straff raised his
own cup, then hesitated, sniffing delicately. He eyed Zane. "Poisoned
tea, Zane?"
Zane said nothing.
"Birchbane,
too," Straff noted. "That's a depressingly unoriginal move
for you."
Zane said nothing.
Straff made a
cutting motion. The girl looked up with terror as one of Straff's
guards stepped toward her. She glanced at Zane, expecting some sort
of aid, but he just looked away. She yelled pathetically as the guard
pulled her off to be executed.
She wanted the
chance to kill him, he thought. I told her it probably
wouldn't work.
Straff just shook
his head. Though not a full Mistborn, the king was a Tineye. Still,
even for one with such an ability, sniffing birchbane amid the
cinnamon was an impressive feat.
"Zane, Zane .
. . " Straff said. "What would you do if you actually
managed to kill me?"
If I actually
wanted to kill you, Zane thought, I'd use that knife, not
poison. But, he let Straff think what he wished. The king
expected assassination attempts. So Zane provided them.
Straff held
something up—a small bead of atium. "I was going to give
you this, Zane. But I see that we'll have to wait. You need to get
over these foolish attempts on my life. If you were ever to succeed,
where would you get your atium?"
Straff didn't
understand, of course. He thought that atium was like a drug, and
assumed that Mistborn relished using it. Therefore, he thought he
could control Zane with it. Zane let the man continue in his
misapprehension, never explaining that he had his own personal
stockpile of the metal.
That, however,
brought him to face the real question that dominated his life. God's
whispers were returning, now that the pain was fading. And, of all
the people the voice whispered about, Straff Venture was the one who
most deserved to die.
"Why?"
God asked. "Why won't you kill him?"
Zane looked down at
his feet. Because he's my father, he thought, finally
admitting his weakness. Other men did what they had to. They were
stronger than Zane.
"You're
insane, Zane," Straff said.
Zane looked up.
"Do you really
think you could conquer the empire yourself, if you were to kill me?
Considering your . . . particular malady, do you think you could run
even a city?"
Zane looked away.
"No."
Straff nodded. "I'm
glad we both understand that."
"You should
just attack," Zane said. "We can find the atium once we
control Luthadel."
Straff smiled, then
sipped the tea. The poisoned tea.
Despite himself,
Zane started, sitting up straight.
"Don't presume
to think you know what I'm planning, Zane," Straff said. "You
don't understand half as much as you assume."
Zane sat quietly,
watching his father drink the last of the tea.
"What of your
spy?" Straff asked.
Zane lay the note
on the table. "He's worried that they might suspect him. He has
found no information about the atium."
Straff nodded,
setting down the empty cup. "You'll return to the city and
continue to befriend the girl."
Zane nodded slowly,
then turned and left the tent.
Straff thought he
could feel the birchbane already, seeping through his veins, making
him tremble. He forced himself to remain in control. Waiting for a
few moments.
Once he was sure
Zane was distant, he called for a guard. "Bring me Amaranta!"
Straff ordered. "Quickly!"
The soldier rushed
to do his master's bidding. Straff sat quietly, tent rustling in the
evening breeze, a puff of mist floating to the floor from the once
open flap. He burned tin, enhancing his senses. Yes . . . he could
feel the poison within him. Deadening his nerves. He had time,
however. As long as an hour, perhaps, and so he relaxed.
For a man who
claimed he didn't want to kill Straff, Zane certainly spent a lot of
effort trying. Fortunately, Straff had a tool even Zane didn't know
about—one that came in the form of a woman. Straff smiled as
his tin-enhanced ears heard soft footsteps approaching in the night.
The soldiers sent
Amaranta right in. Straff hadn't brought all of his mistresses with
him on the trip—just his ten or fifteen favorites. Mixed in
with the ones he was currently bedding, however, were some women that
he kept for their effectiveness rather than their beauty. Amaranta
was a good example. She had been quite attractive a decade before,
but now she was creeping up into her late twenties. Her breasts had
begun to sag from childbirth, and every time Straff looked at her, he
noticed the wrinkles that were appearing on her forehead and around
her eyes. He got rid of most women long before they reached her age.
This one, however,
had skills that were useful. If Zane heard that Straff had sent for
the woman this night, he'd assume that Straff had simply wanted to
bed her. He'd be wrong.
"My lord,"
Amaranta said, getting down on her knees. She began to disrobe.
Well, at least
she's optimistic, Straff thought. He would have thought that
after four years without being called to his bed, she would
understand. Didn't women realize when they were too old to be
attractive?
"Keep your
clothing on, woman," he snapped.
Amaranta's face
fell, and she laid her hands in her lap, leaving her dress half
undone, one breast exposed—as if she were trying to tempt him
with her aging nudity.
"I need your
antidote," he said. "Quickly."
"Which one, my
lord?" she asked. She wasn't the only herbalist Straff kept; he
learned scents and tastes from four different people. Amaranta,
however, was the best of them.
"Birchbane,"
Straff said. "And . . . maybe something else. I'm not sure."
"Another
general potion, then, my lord?" Amaranta asked.
Straff nodded
curtly. Amaranta rose, walking to his poison cabinet. She lit the
burner at the side, boiling a small pot of water as she quickly mixed
powders, herbs, and liquids. The concoction was her particular
specialty—a mixture of all of the basic poison antidotes,
remedies, and reagents in her repertoire. Straff suspected that Zane
had used the birchbane to cover something else. Whatever it was,
however, Amaranta's concoction would deal with—or at least
identify—it.
Straff waited
uncomfortably as Amaranta worked, still half naked. The concoction
needed to be prepared freshly each time, but it was worth the wait.
She eventually brought him a steaming mug. Straff gulped it, forcing
down the harsh liquid despite its bitterness. Immediately, he began
to feel better.
He sighed—another
trap avoided—as he drank the rest of the cup to be certain.
Amaranta knelt expectantly again.
"Go,"
Straff ordered.
Amaranta nodded
quietly. She put her arm back through the dress's sleeve, then
retreated from the tent.
Straff sat stewing,
empty cup cooling in his hand. He knew he held the edge. As long as
he appeared strong before Zane, the Mistborn would continue to do as
commanded.
Probably.
If only I had
passed over Alendi when looking for an assistant, all those years
ago.





19
SAZED
UNCLASPED HIS FINAL STEELMIND. He held it up, the braceletlike
band of metal glistening in the red sunlight. To another man, it
might seem valuable. To Sazed, it was now just another empty husk—a
simple steel bracelet. He could refill it if he wished, but for the
moment he didn't consider the weight worth carrying.
With a sigh, he
dropped the bracelet. It fell with a clank, tossing up a puff of ash
from the ground. Five months of storing, of spending every fifth
day drained of speed, my body moving as if impeded by a thick
molasses. And now it's all gone.
The loss had
purchased something valuable, however. In just six days of travel,
using steelminds on occasion, he had traveled the equivalent of six
weeks' worth of walking. According to his cartography coppermind,
Luthadel was now a little over a week away. Sazed felt good about the
expenditure. Perhaps he'd overreacted to the deaths he'd found in the
little southern village. Perhaps there was no need for him to hurry.
But, he'd created the steelmind to be used.
He hefted his pack,
which was much lighter than it had been. Though many of his
metalminds were small, they were heavy in aggregate. He'd decided to
discard some of the less valuable or less full ones as he ran. Just
like the steel bracelet, which he left sitting in the ash behind him
as he went on.
He was definitely
in the Central Dominance now. He'd passed Faleast and Tyrian, two of
the northern Ashmounts. Tyrian was still just barely visible to the
south—a tall, solitary peak with a cut-off, blackened top. The
landscape had grown flat, the trees changing from patchy brown pines
to the willowy white aspens common around Luthadel. The aspens rose
like bones growing from the black soil, clumping, their ashen white
bark scarred and twisted. They—
Sazed paused. He
stood near the central canal, one of the main routes to Luthadel. The
canal was empty of boats at the moment; travelers were rare these
days, even more rare than they had been during the Final Empire, for
bandits were far more common. Sazed had outrun several groups of them
during his hurried flight to Luthadel.
No, solitary
travelers were rare. Armies were far more common—and, judging
from the several dozen trails of smoke he saw rising ahead of him, he
had run afoul of one. It stood directly between him and Luthadel.
He thought quietly
for a moment, flakes of ash beginning to fall lightly around him. It
was midday; if that army had scouts, Sazed would have a very
difficult time getting around it. In addition, his steelminds were
empty. He wouldn't be able to run from pursuit.
And yet, an army
within a week of Luthadel. . . . Whose was it, and what threat did it
pose? His curiosity, the curiosity of a scholar, prodded him to seek
a vantage from which to study the troops. Vin and the others could
use any information he gathered.
Decision made,
Sazed located a hill with a particularly large stand of aspens. He
dropped his pack at the base of a tree, then pulled out an ironmind
and began to fill it. He felt the familiar sensation of decreased
weight, and he easily climbed to the top of the thin tree—his
body was now light enough that it didn't take much strength to pull
himself upward.
Hanging from the
very tip of the tree, Sazed tapped his tinmind. The edges of his
vision fuzzed, as always, but with the increased vision he could make
out details about the large group settled into a hollow before him.
He was right about
it being an army. He was wrong about it being made up of men.
"By the
forgotten gods . . . " Sazed whispered, so shocked that he
nearly lost his grip. The army was organized in only the most
simplistic and primitive way. There were no tents, no vehicles, no
horses. Just hundreds of large cooking fires, each ringed with
figures.
And those figures
were of a deep blue. They varied greatly in size; some were just five
feet tall, others were lumbering hulks of ten feet or more. They were
both the same species, Sazed knew. Koloss. The creatures—though
similar to men in base form—never stopped growing. They simply
continued to get bigger as they aged, growing until their hearts
could no longer support them. Then they died, killed by their body's
own growth imperative.
Before they died,
however, they got very large. And very dangerous.
Sazed dropped from
the tree, making his body light enough that he hit the ground softly.
He hurriedly searched through his copperminds. When he found the one
he wanted, he strapped it to his upper left arm, then climbed back up
the tree.
He searched an
index quickly. Somewhere, he'd taken notes on a book about the
koloss—he'd studied it trying to decide if the creatures had a
religion. He'd had someone repeat the notes back to him, so he could
store them in the coppermind. He had the book memorized, too, of
course, but placing so much information directly in his mind would
ruin the—
There, he
thought, recovering the notes. He tapped them from the coppermind,
filling his mind with knowledge.
Most koloss bodies
gave out before they reached twenty years of age. The more "ancient"
creatures were often a massive twelve feet in height, with stocky,
powerful bodies. However, few koloss lived that long—and not
just because of heart failure. Their society—if it could be
called that—was extremely violent.
Excitement suddenly
overcoming apprehension, Sazed tapped tin for vision again, searching
through the thousands of blue humanoids, trying to get visual proof
of what he'd read. It wasn't hard to find fights. Scuffles around the
fires seemed common, and, interestingly, they were always between
koloss of nearly the same size. Sazed magnified his view even
further—gripping the tree tightly to overcome the nausea—and
got his first good look at a koloss.
It was a creature
of smaller size—perhaps six feet tall. It was man-shaped, with
two arms and legs, though its neck was hard to distinguish. It was
completely bald. The oddest feature, however, was its blue skin,
which hung loose and folded. The creature looked like a fat man
might, had all his fat been drained away, leaving the stretched skin
behind.
And . . . the skin
didn't seem to be connected very well. Around the creature's
red, blood-drop eyes, the skin sagged, revealing the facial muscles.
The same was true around the mouth: the skin sagged a few inches
below the chin, the lower teeth and jaw completely exposed.
It was a
stomach-turning sight, especially for a man who was already
nauseated. The creature's ears hung low, flopping down beside its
jawline. Its nose was formless and loose, with no cartilage
supporting it. Skin hung baggily from the creature's arms and legs,
and its only clothing was a crude loincloth.
Sazed turned,
selecting a larger creature—one perhaps eight feet tall—to
study. The skin on this beast wasn't as loose, but it still didn't
seem to fit quite right. Its nose twisted at a crooked angle, pulled
flat against the face by an enlarged head that sat on a stumpy neck.
The creature turned to leer at a companion, and again, the skin
around its mouth didn't quite fit: the lips didn't close completely,
and the holes around the eyes were too big, so they exposed the
muscles beneath.
Like . . . a
person wearing a mask made of skin, Sazed thought, trying to push
away his disgust. So . . . their body continues to grow, but their
skin doesn't?
His thought was
confirmed as a massive, ten-foot-tall beast of a koloss wandered into
the group. Smaller creatures scattered before this newcomer, who
thumped up to the fire, where several horses were roasting.
This largest
creature's skin was pulled so tight it was beginning to tear. The
hairless blue flesh had ripped around the eyes, at the edges of the
mouth, and around the massive chest muscles. Sazed could see little
trails of red blood dripping from the rips. Even where the skin
wasn't torn, it was pulled taut—the nose and ears were so flat
they were almost indistinguishable from the flesh around them.
Suddenly, Sazed's
study didn't seem so academic. Koloss had come to the Central
Dominance. Creatures so violent and uncontrollable that the Lord
Ruler had been forced to keep them away from civilization. Sazed
extinguished his tinmind, welcoming the return to normal vision. He
had to get to Luthadel and warn the others. If they—
Sazed froze. One
problem with enhancing his vision was that he temporarily lost the
ability to see close up—so it wasn't odd that he hadn't noticed
the koloss patrol surrounding his aspens.
By the forgotten
gods! He held firm to the tip of the tree, thinking quickly.
Several koloss were already pushing their way into the stand. If he
dropped to the ground, he'd be too slow to escape. As always, he wore
a pewtermind; he could easily become as strong as ten men, and
maintain it for a good amount of time. He could fight, perhaps . . .
.
Yet, the koloss
carried crude-looking, but massive, swords. Sazed's notes, his
memory, and his lore all agreed: Koloss were very dangerous warriors.
Strong as ten men or not, Sazed wouldn't have the skill to defeat
them.
"Come down,"
called a deep, slurred voice from below. "Come down now."
Sazed looked down.
A large koloss, skin just beginning to stretch, stood at the tree's
base. It gave the aspen a shake.
"Come down
now," the creature repeated.
The lips don't
work very well, Sazed thought. He sounds like a man trying to
talk without moving his lips. He wasn't surprised that the
creature could talk; his notes mentioned that. He was, however,
surprised at how calm it sounded.
I could run,
he thought. He could keep to the tops of trees, perhaps cross the
distance between patches of aspens by dropping his metalminds and
trying to ride gusts of wind. But it would be very difficult—and
very unpredictable.
And he would have
to leave his copperminds—a thousand years of history—behind.
So, pewtermind
ready in case he needed strength, Sazed let go of the tree. The
koloss leader—Sazed could only assume that was what he
was—watched Sazed fall to the ground with a red-eyed stare. The
creature did not blink. Sazed wondered if it even could blink,
its skin stretched as it was.
Sazed plunked to
the ground beside the tree, then reached for his pack.
"No," the
koloss snapped, grabbing the pack with an inhumanly quick swipe of
the arm. It tossed the pack to another koloss.
"I need that,"
Sazed said. "I will be much more cooperative if—"
"Quiet!"
the koloss yelled with a rage so sudden that Sazed took a step
backward. Terrismen were tall—especially Terrismen eunuchs—and
it was very disconcerting to be dwarfed by this beastly creature,
well over nine feet in height, its skin a blackish blue, its eyes the
color of the sun at dusk. It loomed over Sazed, and he cringed in
spite of himself.
Apparently, that
was the proper reaction, for the lead koloss nodded and turned away.
"Come," it slurred, lumbering through the small aspen
forest. The other koloss—about seven of them—followed.
Sazed didn't want
to find out what would happen if he disobeyed. He chose a god—Duis,
a god once said to watch over wearied travelers—and said a
quick, silent prayer. Then he hurried forward, staying with the pack
of koloss as they walked toward the camp.
At least they
didn't kill me out of hand, Sazed thought. He'd half expected
that, considering what he'd read. Of course, even the books didn't
know much. The koloss had been kept separate from mankind for
centuries; the Lord Ruler only called upon them in times of great
martial need, to quell revolts, or to conquer new societies
discovered on the inner islands. At those times, the koloss had
caused absolute destruction and slaughter—or so the histories
claimed.
Could all that
have been propaganda? Sazed wondered. Maybe the koloss aren't
as violent as we assumed.
One of the koloss
beside Sazed howled in sudden anger. Sazed spun as the koloss jumped
at one of its companions. The creature ignored the sword on its back,
instead punching his enemy's head with a blocky fist. The others
paused, turning to watch the fight, but none of them seemed alarmed.
Sazed watched with
growing horror as the aggressor proceeded to repeatedly pummel his
enemy. The defender tried to protect himself, getting out a dagger
and managing to score a cut on the aggressor's arm. The blue skin
tore, seeping bright red blood, as the aggressor got his hands around
his opponent's thick head and twisted.
There was a snap.
The defender stopped moving. The aggressor removed the sword from his
victim's back and strapped it on beside his own weapon, then removed
a small pouch that was tied beside the sword. After that, he stood,
ignoring the wound on his arm, and the group began to walk again.
"Why?"
Sazed asked, shocked. "What was that for?"
The wounded koloss
turned around. "I hated him," he said.
"Move!"
the lead koloss snapped at Sazed.
Sazed forced
himself to start walking. They left the corpse lying in the road. The
pouches, he thought, trying to find something to focus on besides
the brutality. They all carry those pouches. The koloss kept
them tied to their swords. They didn't carry the weapons in sheaths;
they were simply bound on their backs with leather straps. And tied
to those straps were pouches. Sometimes there was just one, though
the two largest creatures in the group each had several.
They look like
coin pouches, Sazed thought. But, the koloss don't have an
economy. Perhaps they keep personal possessions in them? But what
would beasts like these value?
They entered the
camp. There didn't appear to be sentries at the borders—but,
then, why would guards be necessary? It would be very difficult for a
human to sneak into this camp.
A group of smaller
koloss—the five-foot-tall ones—rushed forward as soon as
the group arrived. The murderer threw his extra sword to one of them,
then pointed into the distance. He kept the pouch for himself, and
the small ones rushed off, following the road in the direction of the
body.
Burial detail?
Sazed wondered.
He walked
uncomfortably behind his captors as they penetrated into the camp.
Beasts of all sorts were being roasted over the firepits, though
Sazed didn't think any of them had once been human. In addition, the
ground around the camp had been completely stripped of plant life, as
if it had been grazed by a group of particularly aggressive goats.
And, according to
his coppermind, that wasn't far off the truth. Koloss could,
apparently, subsist on practically anything. They preferred meat, but
would eat any kind of plant—even grass, going so far as to pull
it up by the roots to eat. Some reports even spoke of them eating
dirt and ash, though Sazed found that a little difficult to believe.
He continued to
walk. The camp smelled of smoke, grime, and a strange musk that he
assumed was koloss body odor. Some of the creatures turned as he
passed, watching him with steady red eyes.
It's like they
only have two emotions, he thought, jumping as a fireside koloss
suddenly screamed and attacked a companion. They're either
indifferent or they're enraged.
What would it take
to set them all off at once? And . . . what kind of a disaster would
they cause if that happened? He nervously revised his earlier
thoughts. No, the koloss had not been maligned. The stories he had
heard—stories of koloss running wild in the Farmost Dominance,
causing widespread destruction and death—were obviously true.
But something kept
this group marginally reined in. The Lord Ruler had been able to
control the koloss, though no book explained how. Most writers simply
accepted this ability as part of what had made the Lord Ruler God.
The man had been immortal—compared with that, other powers
seemed mundane.
His immortality,
however, was a trick, Sazed thought. Simply a clever
combination of Feruchemical and Allomantic powers. The Lord Ruler
had been just a normal man—albeit one with an unusual
combination of abilities and opportunities.
That being the
case, how had he controlled the koloss? There was something
different about the Lord Ruler. Something more than his powers. He
did something at the Well of Ascension, something that forever
changed the world. Perhaps his ability to control the koloss came
from that.
Sazed's captors
ignored the occasional fights around firepits. There didn't appear to
be any female koloss in the camp—or, if there were, they were
indistinguishable from the males. Sazed did, however, notice a koloss
corpse lying forgotten near one of the fires. It had been flayed, the
blue skin ripped free.
How could any
society exist like this? he thought with horror. His books said
the koloss bred and aged quickly—a fortunate situation for
them, considering the number of deaths he had already seen. Even so,
it seemed to him that this species killed too many of its members to
continue.
Yet they did
continue. Unfortunately. The Keeper in him believed strongly that
nothing should be lost, that every society was worth remembering.
However, the brutality of the koloss camp—the wounded creatures
who sat, ignoring the gashes in their skin, the flayed corpses along
the path, the sudden bellows of anger and subsequent murders—tested
this belief.
His captors led him
around a small hillock in the land, and Sazed paused as he saw
something very unexpected.
A tent.
"Go," the
lead koloss said, pointing.
Sazed frowned.
There were several dozen humans outside the tent, carrying spears and
dressed like imperial guards. The tent was large, and behind it stood
a line of boxy carts.
"Go!" the
koloss yelled.
Sazed did as he was
told. Behind him, one of the koloss indifferently tossed Sazed's pack
toward the human guards. The metalminds inside clinked together as
they hit the ashy ground, causing Sazed to cringe. The soldiers
watched the koloss retreat with a wary eye; then one picked up the
pack. Another leveled his spear at Sazed.
Sazed held up his
hands. "I am Sazed, a Keeper of Terris, once steward, now
teacher. I am not your enemy."
"Yes, well,"
the guard said, still watching the retreating koloss. "You're
still going to have to come with me."
"May I have my
possessions back?" Sazed asked. This hollow appeared free of
koloss; apparently, the human soldiers wanted to keep their distance.
The first guard
turned to his companion, who was perusing Sazed's pack. The second
guard looked up and shrugged. "No weapons. Some bracelets and
rings, maybe worth something."
"None of them
are of precious metals," Sazed said. "They are the tools of
a Keeper, and are of little value to anyone but myself."
The second guard
shrugged, handing the bag to the first man. Both were of standard
Central Dominance coloring—dark hair, light skin, the build and
height of those who'd had proper nutrition as children. The first
guard was the older of the two, and was obviously in charge. He took
the bag from his companion. "We'll see what His Majesty says."
Ah, Sazed
thought. "Let us speak with him then."
The guard turned,
pushing aside the tent door and motioning for Sazed to enter. Sazed
stepped from red sunlight into a functional—if sparsely
furnished—tent room. This main chamber was large, and contained
several more guards. Sazed had seen perhaps two dozen so far.
The lead guard
walked forward and poked his head into a room at the back. A few
moments later, he waved Sazed forward and pulled back the tent door.
Sazed entered the
second chamber. The man inside wore the pants and suit jacket of a
Luthadel nobleman. He was balding—his hair reduced to a few
struggling wisps—despite his youth. He stood, tapping the side
of his leg with a nervous hand, and jumped slightly when Sazed
entered.
Sazed recognized
the man. "Jastes Lekal."
"King
Lekal," Jastes snapped. "Do I know you, Terrisman?"
"We have not
met, Your Majesty," Sazed said, "but I have had some
dealings with a friend of yours, I think. King Elend Venture of
Luthadel?"
Jastes nodded
absently. "My men say the koloss brought you. They found you
poking around the camp?"
"Yes, Your
Majesty," Sazed said carefully, watching as Jastes began to
pace. This man isn't much more stable than the army he apparently
leads, he thought with dissatisfaction. "How is it that you
have persuaded the creatures to serve you?"
"You are a
prisoner, Terrisman," Jastes snapped. "No questions. Did
Elend send you to spy on me?"
"I was sent by
no man," Sazed said. "You happened to be in my path, Your
Majesty. I meant no harm by my observations."
Jastes paused,
eyeing Sazed, before beginning to pace again. "Well, never mind.
I've been without a proper steward for some time now. You will serve
me now."
"I apologize,
Your Majesty," Sazed said, bowing slightly. "But that will
not be possible."
Jastes frowned.
"You're a steward—I can tell that from the robes. Is Elend
so great a master that you would deny me?"
"Elend Venture
is not my master, Your Majesty," Sazed said, meeting the young
king's eyes. "Now that we are free, the Terrismen no longer call
any man master. I cannot be your servant, for I can be no man's
servant. Keep me as prisoner, if you must. But I will not serve you.
I apologize."
Jastes paused
again. Instead of being angry, however, he simply seemed . . .
embarrassed. "I see."
"Your
Majesty," Sazed said calmly, "I realize that you commanded
me to ask no questions, so I will instead make observations. You
appear to have placed yourself in a very poor position. I know not
how you control these koloss, but I cannot help but think that your
grip is tenuous. You are in danger, and you appear intent on sharing
that danger with others."
Jastes flushed.
"Your 'observations' are flawed, Terrisman. I am in
control of this army. They obey me completely. How many other
noblemen have you seen gather koloss armies? None—only I have
been successful."
"They do not
seem very much under control, Your Majesty."
"Oh?"
Jastes asked. "And did they tear you apart when they found you?
Pummel you to death for sport? Ram a stick through you and roast you
over one of their fires? No. They don't do these things because I
commanded them otherwise. It may not seem like much, Terrisman, but
trust me—this is a sign of great restraint and obedience for
koloss."
"Civilization
is no great achievement, Your Majesty."
"Do not try
me, Terrisman!" Jastes snapped, running a hand through the
remnants of his hair. "These are koloss we speak of—we
can't expect much from them."
"And you bring
them to Luthadel?" Sazed asked. "Even the Lord Ruler feared
these creatures, Your Majesty. He kept them away from cities. You
bring them to the most populated area in all of the Final Empire!"
"You don't
understand," Jastes said. "I tried overtures of peace, but
nobody listens unless you have money or an army. Well, I have one,
and I'll soon have the other. I know Elend's sitting on that stash of
atium—and I'm just come to . . . to make an alliance with him."
"An alliance
where you take over control of the city?"
"Bah!"
Jastes said with a wave of his hand. "Elend doesn't control
Luthadel—he's just a placeholder waiting for someone more
powerful to come along. He's a good man, but he's an innocent
idealist. He's going to lose his throne to one army or another, and
I'll give him a better deal than Cett or Straff will, that's
certain."
Cett? Straff?
What kind of trouble has young Venture gotten himself into? Sazed
shook his head. "Somehow I doubt that a 'better deal' involves
the use of koloss, Your Majesty."
Jastes frowned.
"You certainly are smart-mouthed, Terrisman. You're a sign—your
entire people are a sign—of what has gone wrong with the world.
I used to respect the Terris people. There's no shame in being a good
servant."
"There's often
little pride in it either," Sazed said. "But, I apologize
for my attitude, Your Majesty. It is not a manifestation of Terris
independence. I have always been too free with my comments, I think.
I never made the best of stewards." Or the best of Keepers,
he added to himself.
"Bah,"
Jastes said again, resuming his pacing.
"Your
Majesty," Sazed said. "I must continue to Luthadel. There
are . . . events I need to deal with. Think what you will of my
people, but you must know that we are honest. The work I do is beyond
politics and wars, thrones and armies. It is important for all men."
"Scholars
always say things like that," Jastes said. He paused. "Elend
always said things like that."
"Regardless,"
Sazed continued, "I must be allowed to leave. In exchange for my
freedom, I will deliver a message from you to His Majesty King Elend,
if you wish."
"I could send
a messenger of my own at any time!"
"And leave
yourself with one less man to protect you from the koloss?"
Sazed said.
Jastes paused just
briefly.
Ah, so he does
fear them. Good. At least he's not insane.
"I will
be leaving, Your Majesty," Sazed said. "I do not mean to be
arrogant, but I can see that you don't have the resources to keep
prisoners. You can let me go, or you can give me to the koloss. I
would be wary, however, of letting them get into a habit of killing
humans."
Jastes eyed him.
"Fine," he said. "Deliver this message, then. Tell
Elend that I don't care if he knows I'm coming—I don't even
care if you give our numbers. Be sure you're accurate, though! I have
over twenty thousand koloss in this army. He can't fight me. He can't
fight the others, either. But, if I had those city walls . . . well,
I could hold off both other armies for him. Tell him to be logical.
If he gives over the atium, I'll even let him keep Luthadel. We can
be neighbors. Allies."
One bankrupt of
coin, the other bankrupt of common sense, Sazed thought. "Very
well, Your Majesty. I will speak with Elend. I will need the return
of my possessions, however."
The king waved a
hand in annoyance, and Sazed withdrew, waiting quietly as the lead
guard entered the king's chambers again and received his orders. As
he waited for the soldiers to prepare—his pack thankfully
returned to him—Sazed thought about what Jastes had said. Cett
or Straff. Just how many forces were working on Elend to take his
city?
If Sazed had wanted
a quiet place to study, he'd apparently chosen the wrong direction to
run.
It wasn't until
a few years later that I began to notice the signs. I knew the
prophecies—I am a Terris Worldbringer, after all. And yet, not
all of us are religious men; some, such as myself, are more
interested in other topics. However, during my time with Alendi, I
could not help but become more interested in the Anticipation. He
seemed to fit the signs so well.





20
"THIS IS GOING
TO BE dangerous, Your Majesty," Dockson said.
"It's our only
option," Elend said. He stood behind his table; it was, as
usual, stacked with books. He was backlit by the study's window, and
its colors fell upon the back of his white uniform, dyeing it a
brilliant maroon.
He certainly
does look more commanding in that outfit, Vin thought, sitting in
Elend's plush reading chair, OreSeur resting patiently on the floor
beside her. She still wasn't sure what to think of the changes in
Elend. She knew the alterations were mostly visual—new
clothing, new haircut—but other things about him seemed to be
changing as well. He stood up straighter when he spoke, and was more
authoritative. He was even training in the sword and the cane.
Vin glanced at
Tindwyl. The matronly Terriswoman sat in a stiff chair at the back of
the room, watching the proceedings. She had perfect posture, and was
ladylike in her colorful skirt and blouse. She didn't sit with her
legs folded beneath her, as Vin currently did, and she'd never wear
trousers.
What is it about
her? Vin thought. I've spent a year trying to get Elend to
practice his swordsmanship. Tindwyl's been here less than a month,
and she already has him sparring.
Why did Vin feel
bitter? Elend wouldn't change that much, would he? She tried to quiet
the little piece of her that worried about this new confident,
well-dressed warrior of a king—worried that he would turn out
to be different from the man she loved.
What if he stopped
needing her?
She pulled down
into the chair just a little bit farther as Elend continued to speak
with Ham, Dox, Clubs, and Breeze.
"El," Ham
said, "you realize that if you go into the enemy camp, we won't
be able to protect you."
"I'm not sure
you can protect me here, Ham," Elend said. "Not with two
armies camped practically against the walls."
"True,"
Dockson said, "but I'm worried that if you enter that camp,
you'll never come out."
"Only if I
fail," Elend said. "If I follow the plan—convince my
father that we're his allies—he'll let me return. I didn't
spend a lot of time politicking in the court when I was younger.
However, one thing I did learn to do was manipulate my father.
I know Straff Venture—and I know that I can beat him. Besides,
he doesn't want me dead."
"Can we be
sure of that?" Ham asked, rubbing his chin.
"Yes,"
Elend said. "After all, Straff hasn't sent assassins after me,
while Cett has. It makes sense. What better person for Straff to
leave in control of Luthadel than his own son? He thinks he can
control me—he'll assume that he can make me give him Luthadel.
If I play into that, I should be able to get him to attack Cett."
"He does have
a point . . . " Ham said.
"Yes,"
Dockson said, "but what is to keep Straff from just taking you
hostage and forcing his way into Luthadel?"
"He'll still
have Cett at his back," Elend said. "If he fights us, he'll
lose men—a lot of men—and expose himself to attack from
behind."
"But he'll
have you, my dear man," Breeze said. "He wouldn't have to
attack Luthadel—he could force us to give in."
"You'll have
orders to let me die first" Elend said. "That's why I set
up the Assembly. It has the power to choose a new king."
"But why?"
Ham asked. "Why take this risk, El? Let's wait a bit longer and
see if we can get Straff to meet with you in a more neutral
location."
Elend sighed. "You
have to listen to me, Ham. Siege or no siege, we can't just
sit here. If we do, either we'll get starved out, or one of those
armies will decide to break the siege and attack us, hoping to take
our walls, then turn and immediately defend against its enemies. They
won't do that easily, but it could happen. It will happen, if
we don't begin to play the kings against one another."
The room fell
silent. The others slowly turned toward Clubs, who nodded. He agreed.
Good job, Elend,
Vin thought.
"Someone has
to meet with my father," Elend said. "And, I need to be
that person. Straff thinks I am a fool, so I can convince him that
I'm no threat. Then, I'll go and persuade Cett that I'm on his side.
When they finally attack each other—each one thinking we're on
their side—we'll withdraw instead and force them to fight it
out. The winner won't have enough strength left to take the city from
us!"
Ham and Breeze
nodded their heads. Dockson, however, shook his. "The plan is
good in theory, but going into the enemy camp unguarded? That seems
foolish."
"Now, see,"
Elend said. "I think this is to our advantage. My father
believes strongly in control and domination. If I walk into his camp,
I'll essentially be telling him that I agree he has authority over
me. I'll seem weak, and he'll assume that he can take me whenever he
wants. It's a risk, but if I don't do this, we die."
The men eyed each
other.
Elend stood up a
little straighter and pulled his hands into fists at his sides. He
always did that when he was nervous.
"I'm afraid
that this isn't a discussion," Elend said. "I've made my
decision."
They're not
going to accept a declaration like that, Vin thought. The crew
were an independent lot.
Yet, surprisingly,
none of them objected.
Dockson finally
nodded his head. "All right, Your Majesty," he said.
"You're going to need to walk a dangerous line—make Straff
believe that he can count on our support, but also convince him that
he can betray us at his leisure. You have to make him want our
strength of arms while at the same time dismissing our strength of
will."
"And,"
Breeze added, "you need to do so without him figuring out that
you're playing both sides."
"Can you do
it?" Ham asked. "Honestly, Elend?"
Elend nodded. "I
can do it, Ham. I've gotten much better at politics this last year."
He said the words with confidence, though Vin noticed that he still
had his fists clenched. He'll have to learn not to do that.
"You may,
perhaps, understand politics," Breeze said, "but this
is scamming. Face it, my friend, you're dreadfully honest—always
talking about how to defend the rights of skaa and the like."
"Now, see,
you're being unfair," Elend said. "Honesty and good
intentions are completely different. Why, I can be just as dishonest
as—" He paused. "Why am I arguing this point? We
admit what has to be done, and we know that I'm the one who has to do
it. Dox, would you draft a letter to my father? Suggest that I would
be happy to visit him. In fact . . . "
Elend paused,
glancing at Vin. Then, he continued. "In fact, tell him that I
want to discuss the future of Luthadel, and because I want to
introduce him to someone special."
Ham chuckled. "Ah,
nothing like bringing a girl home to meet the father."
"Especially
when that girl happens to be the most dangerous Allomancer in the
Central Dominance," Breeze added.
"You think
he'll agree to letting her come?" Dockson said.
"If he
doesn't, there's no deal," Elend said. "Make sure he knows
that. Either way, I do think he'll agree. Straff has a habit of
underestimating me—probably with good reason. However, I'll bet
that sentiment extends to Vin as well. He'll assume she isn't as good
as everyone says."
"Straff has
his own Mistborn," Vin added. "To protect him. It will only
be fair for Elend to be able to bring me. And, if I'm there, I can
get him out should something go wrong."
Ham chuckled again.
"That probably wouldn't make for a very dignified
retreat—getting slung over Vin's shoulder and carried to
safety."
"Better than
dying," Elend said, obviously trying to act good-natured, but
flushing slightly at the same time.
He loves me, but
he's still a man, Vin thought. How many times have I hurt his
pride by being Mistborn while he is simply a normal person? A lesser
man would never have fallen in love with me.
But, doesn't he
deserve a woman that he feels he can protect? A woman who's more like
. . . a woman?
Vin pulled down in
her chair again, seeking warmth within its plushness. However, it was
Elend's study chair, where he read. Didn't he also deserve a woman
who shared his interests, one who didn't find reading a chore? A
woman with whom he could talk about his brilliant political theories?
Why am I
thinking about our relationship so much lately? Vin thought.
We don't belong
in their world, Zane had said. We belong here, in the mists.
You don't belong
with them . . . .
"There is
something else I wanted to mention, Your Majesty," Dockson said.
"You should meet with the Assembly. They've been growing
impatient to get your ear—something about counterfeit coins
being passed in Luthadel."
"I don't
really have time for city business right now," Elend said. "The
prime reason I set up the Assembly was so that they could deal with
these kinds of issues. Go ahead and send them a message, telling them
that I trust their judgment. Apologize for me, and explain that I'm
seeing to the city's defense. I'll try and make the Assembly meeting
next week."
Dockson nodded,
scribbling a note to himself. "Though," he noted, "that
is something else to consider. By meeting with Straff, you'll give up
your hold on the Assembly."
"This isn't an
official parlay," Elend said. "Just an informal meeting. My
resolution from before will still stand."
"In all
honesty, Your Majesty," Dockson said, "I highly doubt that
they will see it that way. You know how angry they are to be
left without recourse until you decide to hold the parlay."
"I know,"
Elend said. "But the risk is worthwhile. We need to meet
with Straff. Once that is done, I can return with—hopefully—good
news for the Assembly. At that point, I can argue that the resolution
hasn't been fulfilled. For now, the meeting goes forward."
More decisive
indeed, Vin thought. He's changing . . . .
She had to stop
thinking about things like that. Instead, she focused on something
else. The conversation turned to specific ways that Elend could
manipulate Straff, each of the crewmembers giving him tips on how to
scam effectively. Vin, however, found herself watching them, looking
for discrepancies in their personalities, trying to decide if any of
them might be the kandra spy.
Was Clubs being
even quieter than normal? Was Spook's shift in language patterns due
to growing maturity, or because the kandra had difficulty mimicking
his slang? Was Ham, perhaps, too jovial? He also seemed to focus less
on his little philosophical puzzles than he once had. Was that
because he was more serious now, or because the kandra didn't know
how to imitate him properly?
It was no good. If
she thought too much, she could spot seeming discrepancies in anyone.
Yet, at the same time, they all seemed like themselves. People were
just too complex to reduce to simple personality traits. Plus, the
kandra would be good—very good. He would have a lifetime of
training in the art of imitating others, and he had probably been
planning his insertion for a long time.
It came down to
Allomancy, then. With all of the activities surrounding the siege and
her studies about the Deepness, however, she hadn't had a chance to
test her friends. As she thought about it, she admitted that the lack
of time excuse was a weak one. The truth was that she was probably
distracting herself because the thought of one of the crew—one
of her first group of friends—being a traitor was just too
upsetting.
She had to get over
that. If there really were a spy in the group, that would be the end
of them. If the enemy kings found out about the tricks Elend was
planning . . .
This in mind, she
tentatively burned bronze. Immediately, she sensed an Allomantic
pulse from Breeze—dear, incorrigible Breeze. He was so good at
Allomancy that even Vin couldn't detect his touch most of the time,
but he was also compulsive about using his power.
He wasn't currently
using it on her, however. She closed her eyes, focusing. Once, long
ago, Marsh had tried to train her in the fine art of using bronze to
read Allomantic pulses. She hadn't realized at the time just how
large a task he'd begun.
When an Allomancer
burned a metal, they gave off an invisible, drumlike beat that only
another Allomancer burning bronze could sense. The rhythm of these
pulses—how quickly the beats came, the way they "sounded"—told
exactly what metal was being burned.
It took practice,
and was difficult, but Vin was getting better at reading the pulses.
She focused. Breeze was burning brass—the internal, mental
Pushing metal. And . . .
Vin focused harder.
She could feel a pattern washing over her, a double dum-dum
beat with each pulse. They felt oriented to her right. The pulses
were washing against something else, something that was sucking them
in.
Elend. Breeze was
focused on Elend. Not surprising, considering the current discussion.
Breeze was always Pushing on the people he interacted with.
Satisfied, Vin sat
back. But then she paused. Marsh implied there was much more to
bronze than many people thought. I wonder . . . .
She squeezed her
eyes shut—ignoring the fact that any of the others who saw her
would think her actions strange—and focused again on the
Allomantic pulses. She flared the bronze, concentrating so hard she
felt she'd give herself a headache. There was a . . . vibration to
the pulses. But what that could mean, she wasn't certain.
Focus! she
told herself. However, the pulses stubbornly refused to yield any
further information.
Fine, she
thought. I'll cheat. She turned off her tin—she almost
always had it on a little bit—then reached inside and burned
the fourteenth metal. Duralumin.
The Allomantic
pulses became so loud . . . so powerful . . . she swore she could
feel their vibrations shaking her apart. They pounded like beats from
a massive drum set right beside her. But she got something from them.
Anxiety,
nervousness, worry, insecurity, anxiety, nervousness, worry—
It was gone, her
bronze expended in one massive flare of power. Vin opened her eyes;
no one in the room was looking at her except OreSeur.
She felt drained.
The headache she'd predicted before now came in full force, thudding
inside her head like the tiny brother of the drum she'd now banished.
However, she held to the information she'd gleaned. It hadn't come in
words, but feelings—and her first fear was that Breeze was
making these emotions appear. Anxiety, nervousness, worry. However,
she immediately realized that Breeze was a Soother. If he focused on
emotions, it would be the ones he was dampening. The ones he
was using his powers to Soothe away.
She looked from him
to Elend. Why . . . he's making Elend more confident! If Elend
stood a little taller, it was because Breeze was quietly helping,
Soothing away anxiety and worry. And Breeze did this even as he
argued and made his usual mocking comments.
Vin studied the
plump man, ignoring her headache, feeling a newfound sense of
admiration. She'd always wondered just a little at Breeze's placement
in the crew. The other men were all, to an extent, idealists. Even
Clubs, beneath his crotchety exterior, had always struck her as a
solidly good man.
Breeze was
different. Manipulative, a little selfish—he seemed like he'd
joined the crew for the challenge, not because he really wanted to
help the skaa. But, Kelsier had always claimed that he'd chosen his
crew carefully, picking the men for their integrity, not just their
skill.
Perhaps Breeze
wasn't an exception after all. Vin watched him pointing his cane at
Ham as he said something flippant. And yet, on the inside, he was
completely different.
You're a good
man, Breeze, she thought, smiling to herself. You just try
your best to hide it.
And he also wasn't
the impostor. She'd known that before, of course; Breeze hadn't been
in the city when the kandra had made the switch. However, having a
second confirmation lifted a tiny bit of her burden.
Now if she could
just eliminate some of the others.
Elend bid the crew
farewell after the meeting. Dockson went to pen the requested
letters, Ham to go over security, Clubs back to training the
soldiers, and Breeze to try and placate the Assembly regarding
Elend's lack of attention.
Vin trailed out of
the study, shooting him a glance, then eyeing Tindwyl. Suspicious
of her still, eh? Elend thought with amusement. He nodded
reassuringly, and Vin frowned, looking just a little annoyed. He
would have let her stay, but . . . well, facing Tindwyl was
embarrassing enough alone.
Vin left the room,
wolfhound kandra at her side. Looks like she's growing more
attached to the creature, Elend thought with satisfaction. It was
good to know that someone watched over her.
Vin shut the door
behind her, and Elend sighed, rubbing his shoulder. Several weeks of
training with the sword and cane were taking a lot out of him, and
his body was bruised. He tried to keep the pain from showing—or,
rather, from letting Tindwyl see him show the pain. At least I
proved that I'm learning, he thought. She had to see how well
I did today.
"Well?"
he asked.
"You are an
embarrassment," Tindwyl said, standing before her chair.
"So you like
to say," Elend said, walking forward to begin piling up a stack
of books. Tindwyl said that he needed to let servants keep his study
clean, something he'd always resisted. The clutter of books and
papers felt right to him, and he certainly didn't want someone else
moving them around.
With her standing
there looking at him, however, it was difficult not to feel
self-conscious about the mess. He stacked another book on the pile.
"Surely you
noticed how well I did," Elend said. "I got them to let me
go into Straff's camp."
"You are king,
Elend Venture," Tindwyl said, arms folded. "Nobody 'lets'
you do anything. The first change in attitude has to be your own—you
have to stop thinking that you need permission or agreement from
those who follow you."
"A king should
lead by consent of his citizens," Elend said. "I will not
be another Lord Ruler."
"A king should
be strong," Tindwyl said firmly. "He accepts counsel, but
only when he asks for it. He makes it clear that the final decision
is his, not his counselors'. You need better control over your
advisors. If they don't respect you, then your enemies won't
either—and the masses never will."
"Ham and the
others respect me."
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow.
"They do!"
"What do they
call you?"
Elend shrugged.
"They're my friends. They use my name."
"Or a close
approximation of it. Right, 'El'?"
Elend flushed,
setting one final book on the stack. "You'd have me force my
friends to address me by my title?"
"Yes,"
Tindwyl said. "Especially in public. You should be addressed as
'Your Majesty,' or at least as 'my lord.'"
"I doubt Ham
would deal well with that," Elend said. "He has some issues
with authority."
"He will get
over them," Tindwyl said, wiping her finger along a bookcase.
She didn't need to hold it up for Elend to know there would be dust
on its tip.
"What about
you?" Elend challenged.
"Me?"
"You call me
'Elend Venture,' not 'Your Majesty.'"
"I am
different," Tindwyl said.
"Well, I don't
see why you should be. You can call me 'Your Majesty' from now on."
Tindwyl smiled
slyly. "Very well, Your Majesty. You can unclench your fists
now. You're going to have to work on that—a statesman should
not give visual clues of his nervousness."
Elend glanced down,
relaxing his hands. "All right."
"In addition,"
Tindwyl continued, "you still hedge too much in your language.
It makes you seem timid and hesitant."
"I'm working
on that."
"Don't
apologize unless you really mean it," Tindwyl said. "And
don't make excuses. You don't need them. A leader is often judged by
how well he bears responsibility. As king, everything that happens in
your kingdom—regardless of who commits the act—is your
fault. You are even responsible for unavoidable events such as
earthquakes or storms."
"Or armies,"
Elend said.
Tindwyl nodded. "Or
armies. It is your responsibility to deal with these things, and if
something goes wrong, it is your fault. You simply have to accept
this."
Elend nodded,
picking up a book.
"Now, let's
talk about guilt," Tindwyl said, seating herself. "Stop
cleaning. That isn't a job for a king."
Elend sighed,
setting down the book.
"Guilt,"
Tindwyl said, "does not become a king. You have to stop feeling
sorry for yourself."
"You just told
me everything that happens in the kingdom is my fault!"
"It is."
"How can I not
feel guilty, then?"
"You have to
feel confident that your actions are the best," Tindwyl
explained. "You have to know that no matter how bad things get,
they would be worse without you. When disaster occurs, you take
responsibility, but you don't wallow or mope. You aren't allowed that
luxury; guilt is for lesser men. You simply need to do what is
expected."
"And that is?"
"To make
everything better."
"Great,"
Elend said flatly. "And if I fail?"
"Then you
accept responsibility, and make everything better on the second try."
Elend rolled his
eyes. "And what if I can't ever make things better? What if I'm
really not the best man to be king?"
"Then you
remove yourself from the position," Tindwyl said. "Suicide
is the preferred method—assuming, of course, that you have an
heir. A good king knows not to foul up the succession."
"Of course,"
Elend said. "So, you're saying I should just kill myself."
"No. I'm
telling you to have pride in yourself, Your Majesty."
"That's not
what it sounds like. Every day you tell me how poor a king I am, and
how my people will suffer because of it! Tindwyl, I'm not the
best man for this position. He got himself killed by the Lord Ruler."
"That is
enough!" Tindwyl snapped. "Believe it or not, Your Majesty,
you are the best person for this position."
Elend snorted.
"You are
best," Tindwyl said, "because you hold the throne now. If
there is anything worse than a mediocre king, it is chaos—which
is what this kingdom would have if you hadn't taken the
throne. The people on both sides, noblemen and skaa, accept you. They
may not believe in you, but they accept you. Step down now—or
even die accidentally—and there would be confusion, collapse,
and destruction. Poorly trained or not, weak of character or not,
mocked or not, you are all this country has. You are king,
Elend Venture."
Elend paused. "I'm
. . . not sure if you're making me feel any better about myself,
Tindwyl."
"It's—"
Elend raised a
hand. "Yes, I know. It's not about how I feel."
"You have no
place for guilt. Accept that you're king, accept that you can do
nothing constructive to change that, and accept responsibility.
Whatever you do, be confident—for if you weren't here, there
would be chaos."
Elend nodded.
"Arrogance,
Your Majesty," Tindwyl said. "Successful leaders all share
one common trait—they believe that they can do a better job
than the alternatives. Humility is fine when considering your
responsibility and duty, but when it comes time to make a decision,
you must not question yourself."
"I'll try."
"Good,"
Tindwyl said. "Now, perhaps, we can move on to another matter.
Tell me, why haven't you married that young girl?"
Elend frowned.
Wasn't expecting that. . . . "That's a very personal
question, Tindwyl."
"Good."
Elend deepened his
frown, but she sat expectantly, watching him with one of her
unrelenting stares.
"I don't
know," Elend finally said, sitting back in his chair, sighing.
"Vin isn't . . . like other women."
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow, her voice softening slightly. "I think that the more
women you come to know, Your Majesty, the more you'll find that
statement applies to all of them."
Elend nodded
ruefully.
"Either way,"
Tindwyl said, "things are not well as they stand. I will not pry
further into your relationship, but—as we've
discussed—appearances are very important to a king. It isn't
appropriate for you to be seen as having a mistress. I realize that
sort of thing was common for imperial nobility. The skaa, however,
want to see something better in you. Perhaps because many noblemen
were so frivolous with their sexual lives, the skaa have always
prized monogamy. They wish desperately for you to respect their
values."
"They'll just
have to be patient with us," Elend said. "I actually want
to marry Vin, but she won't have it."
"Do you know
why?"
Elend shook his
head. "She . . . doesn't seem to make sense a lot of the time."
"Perhaps she
isn't right for a man in your position."
Elend looked up
sharply. "What does that mean?"
"Perhaps you
need someone a little more refined," Tindwyl said. "I'm
certain she's a fine bodyguard, but as a lady, she—"
"Stop,"
Elend snapped. "Vin is fine as she is."
Tindwyl smiled.
"What?"
Elend demanded.
"I've insulted
you all afternoon, Your Majesty, and you barely grew sullen. I
mentioned your Mistborn in a mildly disparaging way, and now you're
ready to throw me out."
"So?"
"So, you do
love her?"
"Of course,"
Elend said. "I don't understand her, but yes. I love her."
Tindwyl nodded. "I
apologize, then, Your Majesty. I had to be certain."
Elend frowned,
relaxing in his chair slightly. "So, this was some kind of test,
then? You wanted to see how I would react to your words about Vin?"
"You will
always be tested by those you meet, Your Majesty. You might as well
grow accustomed to it."
"But, why do
you care about my relationship with Vin?"
"Love is not
easy for kings, Your Majesty," Tindwyl said in an
uncharacteristically kind voice. "You will find that your
affection for the girl can cause far more trouble than any of the
other things we've discussed."
"And that's a
reason to give her up?" Elend asked stiffly.
"No,"
Tindwyl said. "No, I don't think so."
Elend paused,
studying the stately Terriswoman with her square features and her
stiff posture. "That . . . seems odd, coming from you. What
about kingly duty and appearances?"
"We must make
allowances for the occasional exception," Tindwyl said.
Interesting,
Elend thought. He wouldn't have considered her the type to agree to
any sort of "exceptions." Perhaps she's a little deeper
than I've assumed.
"Now,"
Tindwyl said. "How are your training sessions going?"
Elend rubbed his
sore arm. "All right, I suppose. But—"
He was interrupted
by a knock at the door. Captain Demoux entered a moment later. "Your
Majesty, a visitor has arrived from Lord Cett's army."
"A messenger?"
Elend said, standing.
Demoux paused,
looking a little embarrassed. "Well . . . sort of. She says
she's Lord Cett's daughter, and she's come looking for Breeze."
He was born of a
humble family, yet married the daughter of a king.





21
THE YOUNG WOMAN'S
EXPENSIVE DRESS—light red silk with a shawl and lace
sleeves—might have lent her an air of dignity, had she not
scampered forward as soon as Breeze entered the room. Her light
Western hair bouncing, she made a squeal of happiness as she threw
her arms around Breeze's neck.
She was, perhaps,
eighteen years old.
Elend glanced at
Ham, who stood dumbfounded.
"Well, looks
like you were right about Breeze and Cett's daughter," Elend
whispered.
Ham shook his head.
"I didn't think . . . I mean I joked, because it was Breeze, but
I didn't expect to be right!"
Breeze, for his
part, at least had the decency to look terribly uncomfortable in the
young woman's arms. They stood inside the palace atrium, the same
place where Elend had met with his father's messenger.
Floor-to-ceiling windows let in the afternoon light, and a group of
servants stood at one side of the room to wait on Elend's orders.
Breeze met Elend's
eyes, blushing deeply. I don't think I've ever seen him do that
before, Elend thought.
"My dear,"
Breeze said, clearing his throat, "perhaps you should introduce
yourself to the king?"
The girl finally
let go of Breeze. She stepped back, curtsying to Elend with a
noblewoman's grace. She was a bit plump, her hair long after
pre-Collapse fashion, and her cheeks were red with excitement. She
was a cute thing, obviously well trained for the court—exactly
the sort of girl that Elend had spent his youth trying to avoid.
"Elend,"
Breeze said, "might I introduce Allrianne Cett, daughter to Lord
Ashweather Cett, king of the Western Dominance?"
"Your
Majesty," Allrianne said.
Elend nodded. "Lady
Cett." He paused, then—with a hopeful voice—continued.
"Your father sent you as an ambassador?"
Allrianne paused.
"Um . . . he didn't exactly send me, Your Majesty."
"Oh, dear,"
Breeze said, pulling out a handkerchief to dab his brow.
Elend glanced at
Ham, then back at the girl. "Perhaps you should explain,"
he said, gesturing toward the atrium's seats. Allrianne nodded
eagerly, but stayed close to Breeze as they sat. Elend waved for some
servants to bring chilled wine.
He had a feeling he
was going to want something to drink.
"I seek
asylum, Your Majesty," Allrianne said, speaking with a quick
voice. "I had to go. I mean, Breezy must have told you how my
father is!"
Breeze sat
uncomfortably, and Allrianne put an affectionate hand on his knee.
"How your
father is?" Elend asked.
"He is so
manipulative," Allrianne said. "So demanding. He
drove Breezy away, and I absolutely had to follow. I wouldn't spend
another moment in that camp. A war camp! He brought me, a young lady,
along with him to war! Why, do you know what it is like to be leered
at by every passing soldier? Do you understand what it is like to
live in a tent?"
"I—"
"We rarely had
fresh water," Allrianne continued. "And I couldn't take a
decent bath without fear of peeping soldiers! During our travels,
there was dreadful nothing to do all day but sit in the carriage and
bounce, bounce, bounce. Why, until Breezy came, I hadn't had a
refined conversation in weeks. And then, Father drove him away . . .
."
"Because?"
Ham asked eagerly.
Breeze coughed.
"I had to get
away, Your Majesty," Allrianne said. "You have to give me
asylum! I know things that could help you. Like, I saw my father's
camp. I'll bet you don't know that he is getting supplies from the
cannery in Haverfrex! What do you think of that?"
"Um . . .
impressive," Elend said hesitantly.
Allrianne nodded
curtly.
"And, you came
to find Breeze?" Elend asked.
Allrianne flushed
slightly, glancing to the side. However, when she spoke, she
displayed little tact. "I had to see him again, Your Majesty. So
charming, so . . . wonderful. I wouldn't have expected Father to
understand a man such as he."
"I see,"
Elend said.
"Please, Your
Majesty," Allrianne said. "You have to take me in. Now that
I've left Father, I have nowhere else to go!"
"You may
stay—for a time, at least," Elend said, nodding greetings
to Dockson, who had entered through the atrium doors. "But,
you've obviously had a difficult trip. Perhaps you would like an
opportunity to refresh yourself . . . ?"
"Oh, I would
much appreciate that, Your Majesty!"
Elend eyed Cadon,
one of the palace stewards, who stood at the back of the room with
other servants. He nodded; rooms were prepared. "Then,"
Elend said, standing, "Cadon will lead you to some rooms. We
will take dinner this evening at seven, and can speak again then."
"Thank you,
Your Majesty!" Allrianne said, jumping up from her chair. She
gave Breeze another hug, then stepped forward, as if to do the same
for Elend. Fortunately, she thought better of it, instead allowing
the servants to lead her away.
Elend sat. Breeze
sighed deeply, leaning back in a wearied posture as Dockson walked
forward, taking the girl's seat.
"That was . .
. unexpected," Breeze noted.
There was an
awkward pause, the atrium trees shifting slightly in the breeze from
the balcony. Then—with a sharp bark—Ham began to laugh.
The noise sparked Elend, and—despite the danger, despite the
gravity of the problem—he found himself laughing as well.
"Oh,
honestly," Breeze huffed, which only prompted them further.
Perhaps it was the sheer incongruity of the situation, perhaps it was
because he needed to release tension, but Elend found himself
laughing so hard he almost fell from the chair. Ham wasn't doing much
better, and even Dockson cracked a smile.
"I fail to see
the levity in this situation," Breeze said. "The daughter
of Lord Cett—a man who is currently besieging our home—just
demanded asylum in the city. If Cett wasn't determined to kill us
before, he certainly will be now!"
"I know,"
Elend said, taking deep breaths. "I know. It's just . . . "
"It's the
image of you," Ham said, "being hugged by that courtly
fluffcake. I can't think of anything more awkward than you being
confronted by an irrational young woman!"
"This throws
another wrinkle into things," Dockson noted. "Although, I'm
not accustomed to you being the one to bring us a problem of
this nature, Breeze. Honestly, I thought we would be able to avoid
unplanned female attachments now that Kell is gone."
"This isn't my
fault," Breeze said pointedly. "The girl's affection is
completely misplaced."
"That's for
sure," Ham mumbled.
"All right,"
a new voice said. "What was that pink thing I just passed in the
hallway?"
Elend turned to
find Vin standing, arms folded, in the atrium doorway. So quiet.
Why does she walk stealthily even in the palace? She never wore
shoes that clicked, never wore skirts that could rustle, and never
had metal on her clothing that could clink or be Pushed by
Allomancers.
"That wasn't
pink, my dear," Breeze said. "That was red."
"Close
enough," Vin said, walking forward. "She was bubbling to
the servants about how hot her bath needed to be, and making certain
they wrote down her favorite foods."
Breeze sighed.
"That's Allrianne. We'll probably have to get a new pastry
chef—either that, or have desserts ordered in. She's rather
particular about her pastries."
"Allrianne
Cett is the daughter of Lord Cett," Elend explained as
Vin—ignoring the chairs—sat on the edge of a planter
beside his chair, laying a hand on his arm. "Apparently, she and
Breeze are something of an item."
"Excuse me?"
Breeze huffed.
Vin, however,
wrinkled her nose. "That's disgusting, Breeze. You're old. She's
young."
"There was no
relationship," Breeze snapped. "Besides, I'm not that
old—nor is she that young."
"She sounded
like she was about twelve," Vin said.
Breeze rolled his
eyes. "Allrianne was a child of the country court—a little
innocent, a little spoiled—but she hardly deserves to be spoken
of in that manner. She's actually quite witty, in the right
circumstances."
"So, was there
anything between you?" Vin pressed.
"Of course
not," Breeze said. "Well, not really. Nothing real, though
it could have been taken the wrong way. Was taken the wrong
way, actually, once her father discovered . . . Anyway, who are you
to talk, Vin? I seem to remember a certain young girl pining
for an old Kelsier a few years back."
Elend perked up at
this.
Vin flushed. "I
never pined over Kelsier."
"Not even at
the beginning?" Breeze asked. "Come now, a dashing man like
him? He saved you from being beaten by your old crewleader, took you
in . . . "
"You're a sick
man," Vin declared, folding her arms. "Kelsier was like a
father to me."
"Eventually,
perhaps," Breeze said, "but—"
Elend held up a
hand. "Enough," he said. "This line of discussion is
useless."
Breeze snorted, but
fell silent. Tindwyl is right, Elend thought. They will
listen to me if I act like I expect them to.
"We have to
decide what to do," Elend said.
"The daughter
of the man threatening us could be a very powerful bargaining chip,"
Dockson said.
"You mean take
her hostage?" Vin said, eyes narrowing.
Dockson shrugged.
"Someone has to state the obvious, Vin."
"Not really a
hostage," Ham said. "She came to us, after all. Simply
letting her stay could have the same effect as taking her hostage."
"That would
risk antagonizing Cett," Elend said. "Our original plan was
to make him think we're his ally."
"We could give
her back, then," Dockson said. "That could get us a long
way in the negotiations."
"And her
request?" Breeze asked. "The girl wasn't happy in her
father's camp. Shouldn't we at least consider her wishes?"
All eyes turned
toward Elend. He paused. Just a few weeks ago, they would have kept
on arguing. It seemed strange that they should so quickly begin to
look to him for decisions.
Who was he? A man
who had haphazardly ended up on the throne? A poor replacement for
their brilliant leader? An idealist who hadn't considered the dangers
his philosophies would bring? A fool? A child? An impostor?
The best they had.
"She stays,"
Elend said. "For now. Perhaps we'll be forced to return her
eventually, but this will make a useful distraction for Cett's army.
Let them sweat for a bit. It will only buy us more time."
The crewmembers
nodded, and Breeze looked relieved.
I'll do what I
can, make the decisions as I see they must be made, Elend
thought.
Then accept the
consequences.
He could trade
words with the finest of philosophers, and had an impressive memory.
Nearly as good, even, as my own. Yet, he was not argumentative.





22
CHAOS AND
STABILITY, THE MIST was both. Upon the land there was an empire,
within that empire were a dozen shattered kingdoms, within those
kingdoms were cities, towns, villages, plantations. And above them
all, within them all, around them all, was the mist. It was more
constant than the sun, for it could not be hidden by clouds. It was
more powerful than the storms, for it would outlast any weather's
fury. It was always there. Changing, but eternal.
Day was an
impatient sigh, awaiting the night. When the darkness did come,
however, Vin found that the mists did not calm her as they once had.
Nothing seemed
certain anymore. Once the night had been her refuge; now she found
herself glancing behind, watching for ghostly outlines. Once Elend
had been her peace, but he was changing. Once she had been able to
protect the things she loved—but she was growing more and more
afraid that the forces moving against Luthadel were beyond her
capacity to stop.
Nothing frightened
her more than her own impotence. During her childhood she had taken
it for granted that she couldn't change things, but Kelsier had given
her pride in herself.
If she couldn't
protect Elend, what good was she?
There are still
some things I can do, she thought forcefully. She crouched
quietly on a ledge, mistcloak tassels hanging down, waving slightly
in the wind. Just below her, torches burned fitfully at the front of
Keep Venture, illuminating a pair of Ham's guards. They stood alert
in the swirling mists, showing impressive diligence.
The guards wouldn't
be able to see her sitting just above them; they'd barely be able to
see twenty feet in the thick mists. They weren't Allomancers. Besides
the core crew, Elend had access to barely half a dozen Mistings—which
made him Allomantically weak compared with most of the other new
kings in the Final Empire. Vin was supposed to make up the
difference.
The torches
flickered as the doors opened, and a figure left the palace. Ham's
voice echoed quietly in the mist as he greeted his guards. One
reason—perhaps the main reason—that the guards were so
diligent was because of Ham. He might have been a bit of an anarchist
at heart, but he could be a very good leader if he was given a small
team. Though his guards weren't the most disciplined, polished
soldiers Vin had seen, they were fiercely loyal.
Ham talked with the
men for a time, then he waved farewell and walked out into the mists.
The small courtyard between the keep and its wall contained a couple
of guard posts and patrols, and Ham would visit each one in turn. He
walked boldly in the night, trusting to diffused starlight to see,
rather than blinding himself with a torch. A thief's habit.
Vin smiled, leaping
quietly to the ground, then scampering after Ham. He walked on,
ignorant of her presence. What would it be like to have only one
Allomantic power? Vin thought. To be able to make yourself
stronger, but to have ears as weak as those of any normal man? It
had been only two years, but already she had come to rely so heavily
on her abilities.
Ham continued
forward, Vin following discreetly, until they reached the ambush. Vin
tensed, flaring her bronze.
OreSeur howled
suddenly, jumping from a pile of boxes. The kandra was a dark
silhouette in the night, his inhuman baying disturbing even to Vin.
Ham spun, cursing quietly.
And he
instinctively flared pewter. Focused on her bronze, Vin confirmed
that the pulses were definitely coming from him. Ham spun around,
searching in the night as OreSeur landed. Vin, however, simply
smiled. Ham's Allomancy meant he wasn't the impostor. She could cross
another name off her list.
"It's okay,
Ham," Vin said, walking forward.
Ham paused,
lowering his dueling cane. "Vin?" he asked, squinting in
the mist.
"It's me,"
she said. "I'm sorry, you startled my hound. He can get jumpy at
night."
Ham relaxed. "We
all can, I guess. Anything happening tonight?"
"Not that I
can tell," she said. "I'd let you know."
Ham nodded. "I'd
appreciate it—though I doubt you'd need me. I'm captain of the
guard, but you're the one who does all the work."
"You're more
valuable than you think, Ham," Vin said. "Elend confides in
you. Since Jastes and the others left him, he's needed a friend."
Ham nodded. Vin
turned, glancing into the mists, where OreSeur sat waiting on his
haunches. He seemed to be getting more and more comfortable with his
hound's body.
Now that she knew
Ham was not an impostor, there was something she needed to discuss
with him. "Ham," she said, "your protection of Elend
is more valuable than you know."
"You're
talking about the impostor," Ham said quietly. "El has me
searching through the palace staff to see who might have gone missing
for a few hours on that day. It's a tough task, though."
She nodded.
"There's something else, Ham. I'm out of atium."
He stood quietly in
the mists for a moment, and then she heard him mutter a curse.
"I'll die the
next time I fight a Mistborn," she said.
"Not unless he
has atium," Ham said.
"What are the
chances that someone would send a Mistborn without atium to fight
me?"
He hesitated.
"Ham,"
she said, "I need to find a way to fight against someone who is
burning atium. Tell me that you know a way."
Ham shrugged in the
darkness. "There are lots of theories, Vin. I once had a long
conversation with Breeze about this—though he spent most of it
grumbling that I was annoying him."
"Well?"
Vin asked. "What can I do?"
He rubbed his chin.
"Most people agree that the best way to kill a Mistborn with
atium is to surprise them."
"That doesn't
help if they attack me first," Vin said.
"Well,"
Ham said. "Barring surprise, there isn't much. Some people think
that you might be able to kill an atium-using Mistborn if you
catch them in an unavoidable situation. It's like a game of
fets—sometimes, the only way to take a piece is to corner it so
that no matter which way it moves, it dies.
"Doing that to
a Mistborn is pretty tough, though. The thing is, atium lets the
Mistborn see the future—so he knows when a move will trap him,
and so he can avoid the situation. The metal is supposed to enhance
his mind somehow, too."
"It does. When
I'm burning atium, I often dodge before I even register the attacks
that are coming."
Ham nodded.
"So," Vin
said, "what else?"
"That's it,
Vin," Ham said. "Thugs talk about this topic a lot—we're
all afraid of going up against a Mistborn. Those are your two
options: Surprise him or overwhelm him. I'm sorry."
Vin frowned.
Neither option would do her much good if she got ambushed. "Anyway,
I need to keep moving. I promise to tell you about any corpses I
produce."
Ham laughed. "How
about you just try and avoid getting into situations where you have
to produce them, eh? The Lord only knows what this kingdom would do
if we lost you . . . "
Vin nodded, though
she wasn't certain how much Ham could see of her in the darkness. She
waved to OreSeur, heading out toward the keep wall, leaving Ham on
the cobbled path.
"Mistress,"
OreSeur said as they reached the top of the wall, "might I know
the purpose of surprising Master Hammond like that? Are you that fond
of startling your friends?"
"It was a
test," Vin said, pausing beside a merlon gap, looking out over
the city proper.
"A test,
Mistress?"
"To see if he
would use Allomancy. That way, I could know that he wasn't the
impostor."
"Ah," the
kandra said. "Clever, Mistress."
Vin smiled. "Thank
you," she said. A guard patrol was moving toward them. Not
wanting to have to deal with them, Vin nodded to the wall-top stone
guardhouse. She jumped, pushing off a coin, and landed on top of it.
OreSeur bounded up beside her, using his strange kandra musculature
to leap the ten feet.
Vin sat down
cross-legged to think, and OreSeur padded over to the roof's side and
lay down, paws hanging over the edge. As they sat, Vin considered
something. OreSeur told me that a kandra didn't gain Allomantic
powers if he ate an Allomancer . . . but, can a kandra be an
Allomancer on his own? I never did finish that conversation.
"This will
tell me if a person isn't a kandra, won't it?" Vin asked,
turning to OreSeur. "Your people don't have Allomantic powers,
right?"
OreSeur didn't
answer.
"OreSeur?"
Vin said.
"I'm not
required to answer that question, Mistress."
Yes, Vin
thought with a sigh. The Contract. How am I supposed to catch this
other kandra if OreSeur won't answer any of my questions? She
leaned back in frustration, staring up into the endless mists, using
her mistcloak to cushion her head.
"Your plan
will work, Mistress," OreSeur said quietly.
Vin paused, rolling
her head to look at him. He lay with head on forepaws, staring over
the city. "If you sense Allomancy from someone, then they aren't
a kandra."
Vin sensed a
hesitant reluctance to his words, and he didn't look at her. It was
as if he spoke grudgingly, giving up information that he'd rather
have kept to himself.
So secretive,
Vin thought. "Thank you," she said.
OreSeur shrugged a
pair of canine shoulders.
"I know you'd
rather not have to deal with me," she said. "We'd both
rather keep our distance from each other. But, we'll just have to
make things work this way."
OreSeur nodded
again, then turned his head slightly and looked at her. "Why is
it that you hate me?"
"I don't hate
you," Vin said.
OreSeur raised a
canine eyebrow. There was a wisdom in those eyes, an understanding
that Vin was surprised to see. She'd never seen such things in him
before.
"I . . . "
Vin trailed off, looking away. "I just haven't ever gotten over
the fact that you ate Kelsier's body."
"That isn't
it," OreSeur said, turning back to look at the city. "You're
too smart to be bothered by that."
Vin frowned
indignantly, but the kandra wasn't looking at her. She turned,
staring back up at the mists. Why did he bring this up? she
thought. We were just starting to get along. She'd been
willing to forget.
You really want
to know? she thought. Fine.
"It's because
you knew," she whispered.
"Excuse me,
Mistress?"
"You knew,"
Vin said, still looking into the mists. "You were the only one
on the crew who knew Kelsier was going to die. He told you that he
was going to let himself be killed, and that you were to take his
bones."
"Ah,"
OreSeur said quietly.
Vin turned accusing
eyes at the creature. "Why didn't you say something? You knew
how we felt about Kelsier. Did you even consider telling us
that the idiot planned to kill himself? Did it even cross your mind
that we might be able to stop him, that we might be able to find
another way?"
"You are being
quite harsh, Mistress."
"Well, you
wanted to know," Vin said. "It was worst right after he
died. When you came to be my servant, by his order. You never even
spoke of what you'd done."
"The Contract,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "You do not wish to hear this,
perhaps, but I was bound. Kelsier did not wish you to know of his
plans, so I could not tell you. Hate me if you must, but I do not
regret my actions."
"I don't hate
you." I got over that. "But, honestly, you wouldn't
even break the Contract for his own good? You served Kelsier for two
years. Didn't it even hurt you to know he was going to die?"
"Why should I
care if one master or another dies?" OreSeur said. "There
is always another to take their place."
"Kelsier
wasn't that kind of master," Vin said.
"Wasn't he?"
"No."
"I apologize,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "I will believe as commanded,
then."
Vin opened her
mouth to reply, then snapped it closed. If he was determined to keep
thinking like a fool, then it was his right to do so. He could
continue to resent masters, just as . . .
Just as she
resented him. For keeping his word, for holding to his Contract.
Ever since I've
known him, I've done nothing but treat him poorly, Vin thought.
First, when he was Renoux, I reacted against his haughty
bearing—but that bearing wasn't his, it was part of the act he
had to play. Then, as OreSeur, I avoided him. Hated him, even, for
letting Kelsier die. Now I've forced him into an animal's body.
And, in two
years of knowing him, the only times I've asked about his past, I did
it so that I could glean more information about his people so that I
could find the impostor.
Vin watched the
mists. Of all the people in the crew, only OreSeur had been an
outsider. He hadn't been invited to their conferences. He hadn't
inherited a position in the government. He'd helped as much as any of
them, playing a vital role—that of the "spirit"
Kelsier, who had returned from the grave to incite the skaa to their
final rebellion. Yet, while the rest of them had titles, friendships,
and duties, the only thing OreSeur had gained from overthrowing the
Final Empire was another master.
One who hated him.
No wonder he
reacts like he does, Vin thought. Kelsier's last words to her
returned to her mind: You have a lot to learn about friendship,
Vin. . . . Kell and the others had invited her in, treated her
with dignity and friendliness, even when she hadn't deserved it.
"OreSeur,"
she said, "what was your life like before you were recruited by
Kelsier?"
"I don't see
what that has to do with finding the impostor, Mistress,"
OreSeur said.
"It doesn't
have anything to do with that," Vin said. "I just thought
maybe I should get to know you better."
"My apologies,
Mistress, but I don't want you to know me."
Vin sighed. So
much for that.
But . . . well,
Kelsier and the others hadn't turned away when she'd been blunt with
them. There was a familiar tone to OreSeur's words. Something in them
that she recognized.
"Anonymity,"
Vin said quietly.
"Mistress?"
"Anonymity.
Hiding, even when you're with others. Being quiet, unobtrusive.
Forcing yourself to stay apart—emotionally, at least. It's a
way of life. A protection."
OreSeur didn't
answer.
"You serve
beneath masters," Vin said. "Harsh men who fear your
competence. The only way to keep them from hating you is to make
certain they don't pay attention to you. So, you make yourself look
small and weak. Not a threat. But sometimes you say the wrong thing,
or you let your rebelliousness show."
She turned toward
him. He was watching her. "Yes," he finally said, turning
to look back over the city.
"They hate
you," Vin said quietly. "They hate you because of your
powers, because they can't make you break your word, or because they
worry that you are too strong to control."
"They become
afraid of you," OreSeur said. "They grow
paranoid—terrified, even as they use you, that you will take
their place. Despite the Contract, despite knowing that no kandra
would break his sacred vow, they fear you. And men hate what they
fear."
"And so,"
Vin said, "they find excuses to beat you. Sometimes, even your
efforts to remain harmless seem to provoke them. They hate your
skill, they hate the fact that they don't have more reasons to beat
you, so they beat you."
OreSeur turned back
to her. "How do you know these things?" he demanded.
Vin shrugged.
"That's not only how they treat kandra, OreSeur. That's the same
way crewleaders treat a young girl—an anomaly in a thieving
underground filled with men. A child who had a strange ability to
make things happen—to influence people, to hear what she
shouldn't, to move more quietly and quickly than others. A tool, yet
a threat at the same time."
"I . . .
didn't realize, Mistress . . . ."
Vin frowned. How
could he not have known about my past? He knew I was a street urchin.
Except . . . had he? For the first time, Vin realized how OreSeur
must have seen her two years before, when she'd first met him. He had
arrived in the area after her recruitment; he probably assumed that
she'd been part of Kelsier's team for years, like the others.
"Kelsier
recruited me for the first time just a few days before I met you,"
Vin said. "Well, actually, he didn't so much recruit me
as rescue me. I spent my childhood serving in one thieving
crew after another, always working for the least reputable and most
dangerous men, for those were the only ones who would take in a
couple of transients like my brother and me. The smart crewleaders
learned that I was a good tool. I'm not sure if they figured out that
I was an Allomancer—some probably did, others just thought I
was 'lucky.' Either way, they needed me. And that made them hate me."
"So they beat
you?"
Vin nodded. "The
last one especially. That was when I was really beginning to figure
out how to use Allomancy, even though I didn't know what it was.
Camon knew, though. And he hated me even as he used me. I think he
was afraid that I would figure out how to use my powers fully. And on
that day, he worried that I would kill him . . . " Vin turned
her head, looking at OreSeur. "Kill him and take his place as
crewleader."
OreSeur sat
quietly, up on his haunches now, regarding her.
"Kandra aren't
the only ones that humans treat poorly," Vin said quietly.
"We're pretty good at abusing each other, too."
OreSeur snorted.
"With you, at least, they had to hold back for fear they'd kill
you. Have you ever been beaten by a master who knows that no matter
how hard he hits, you won't die? All he has to do is get you a new
set of bones, and you'll be ready to serve again the next day. We are
the ultimate servant—you can beat us to death in the morning,
then have us serve you dinner that night. All the sadism, none of the
cost."
Vin closed her
eyes. "I understand. I wasn't a kandra, but I did have pewter. I
think Camon knew he could beat me far harder than he should have been
able to."
"Why didn't
you run?" OreSeur asked. "You didn't have a Contract
bonding you to him."
"I . . . don't
know," Vin said. "People are strange, OreSeur, and loyalty
is so often twisted. I stayed with Camon because he was familiar, and
I feared leaving more than I did staying. That crew was all I had. My
brother was gone, and I was terrified of being alone. It seems kind
of strange now, thinking back."
"Sometimes a
bad situation is still better than the alternative. You did what you
needed to do to survive."
"Perhaps,"
Vin said. "But there's a better way, OreSeur. I didn't know it
until Kelsier found me, but life doesn't have to be like that. You
don't have to spend your years mistrusting, staying in the shadows
and keeping yourself apart."
"Perhaps if
you are human. I am kandra."
"You can still
trust," Vin said. "You don't have to hate your
masters."
"I don't hate
them all, Mistress."
"But you don't
trust them."
"It is nothing
personal, Mistress."
"Yes it is,"
Vin said. "You don't trust us because you're afraid we'll hurt
you. I understand that—I spent months with Kelsier wondering
when I was going to get hurt again."
She paused. "But
OreSeur, nobody betrayed us. Kelsier was right. It seems
incredible to me even now, but the men in this crew—Ham,
Dockson, Breeze—they're good people. And, even if one of them
were to betray me, I'd still rather have trusted them. I can sleep at
night, OreSeur. I can feel peace, I can laugh. Life is different.
Better."
"You are
human," OreSeur said stubbornly. "You can have friends
because they don't worry that you'll eat them, or some other
foolishness."
"I don't think
that about you."
"Don't you?
Mistress, you just admitted that you resent me because I ate Kelsier.
Beyond that, you hate the fact that I followed my Contract. You, at
least, have been honest.
"Human beings
find us disturbing. They hate that we eat their kind, even though we
only take bodies that are already dead. Your people find it
unsettling that we can take their forms. Don't tell me that you
haven't heard the legends of my people. Mistwraiths, they call
us—creatures that steal the shapes of men who go into the
mists. You think a monster like that, a legend used to frighten
children, will ever find acceptance in your society?"
Vin frowned.
"This is the
reason for the Contract, Mistress," OreSeur said, his muffled
voice harsh as he spoke through dog's lips. "You wonder why we
don't just run away from you? Meld into your society, and become
unseen? We tried that. Long ago, when the Final Empire was new. Your
people found us, and they started to destroy us. They used Mistborn
to hunt us down, for there were many more Allomancers in those days.
Your people hated us because they feared we would replace them. We
were almost completely destroyed—and then we came up with the
Contract."
"But, what
difference does that make?" Vin asked. "You're still doing
the same things, aren't you?"
"Yes, but now
we do them at your command," OreSeur said. "Men like
power, and they love controlling something powerful. Our people
offered to serve, and we devised a binding contract—one that
every kandra vowed to uphold. We will not kill men. We will take
bones only when we are commanded. We will serve our masters with
absolute obedience. We began to do these things, and men stopped
killing us. They still hated and feared us—but they also knew
they could command us.
"We became
your tools. As long as we remain subservient, Mistress, we survive.
And that is why I obey. To break the Contract would be to betray my
people. We cannot fight you, not while you have Mistborn, and so we
must serve you."
Mistborn. Why
are Mistborn so important? He implied that they could find kandra
. . . .
She kept this
tidbit to herself; she sensed that if she pointed it out, he'd close
up again. So, instead, she sat up and met his eyes in the darkness.
"If you wish, I will free you from your Contract."
"And what
would that change?" OreSeur asked. "I'd just get another
Contract. By our laws I must wait another decade before I have time
for freedom—and then only two years, during which time I won't
be able to leave the kandra Homeland. To do otherwise would risk
exposure."
"Then, at
least accept my apology," she asked. "I was foolish to
resent you for following your Contract."
OreSeur paused.
"That still doesn't fix things, Mistress. I still have to wear
this cursed dog's body—I have no personality or bones to
imitate!"
"I'd think
that you would appreciate the opportunity simply to be yourself."
"I feel
naked," OreSeur said. He sat quietly for a moment; then he bowed
his head. "But . . . I have to admit that there are advantages
to these bones. I didn't realize how unobtrusive they would make me."
Vin nodded. "There
were times in my life when I would have given anything to be able to
take the form of a dog and just live my life being ignored."
"But not
anymore?"
Vin shook her head.
"No. Not most of the time, anyway. I used to think that everyone
was like you say—hateful, hurtful. But there are good people in
the world, OreSeur. I wish I could prove that to you."
"You speak of
this king of yours," OreSeur said, glancing toward the keep.
"Yes,"
Vin said. "And others."
"You?"
Vin shook her head.
"No, not me. I'm not a good person or a bad person. I'm just
here to kill things."
OreSeur watched her
for a moment, then settled back down. "Regardless," he
said, "you are not my worst master. That is, perhaps, a
compliment among our people."
Vin smiled, but her
own words left her a bit haunted. Just here to kill things . .
. .
She glanced toward
the light of the armies outside the city. A part—the part that
had been trained by Reen, the part that still occasionally used his
voice in the back of her mind—whispered that there was another
way to fight these armies. Rather than rely on politics and parlays,
the crew could use Vin. Send her on a quiet visit into the night that
left the kings and generals of the armies dead.
But, she knew that
Elend wouldn't approve of something like that. He'd argue against
using fear to motivate, even on one's enemies. He'd point out that if
she killed Straff or Cett, they'd just be replaced by other men, men
even more hostile toward the city.
Even so, it seemed
like such a brutal, logical answer. A piece of Vin itched to do it,
if only to be doing something other than waiting and talking. She was
not a person meant to be besieged.
No, she
thought. That's not my way. I don't have to be like Kelsier was.
Hard. Unyielding. I can be something better. Something that trusts in
Elend's way.
She shoved aside
that part of her that wanted to just go assassinate both Straff and
Cett, then turned her attention to other things. She focused on her
bronze, watching for signs of Allomancy. Though she liked to jump
around and "patrol" the area, the truth was that she was
just as effective staying in one place. Assassins would be likely to
scout the front gates, for that was where patrols began and the
largest concentration of soldiers waited.
Still, she felt her
mind wandering. There were forces moving in the world, and Vin wasn't
certain if she wanted to be part of them.
What is my
place? she thought. She never felt that she'd discovered it—not
back when she'd been playing as Valette Renoux, and not now, when she
acted as the bodyguard to the man she loved. Nothing quite fit.
She closed her
eyes, burning tin and bronze, feeling the touch of wind-borne mist on
her skin. And, oddly, she felt something else, something very faint.
In the distance she could sense Allomantic pulsings. They were so
dull she almost missed them.
They were kind of
like the pulses given off by the mist spirit. She could hear it, too,
much closer. Atop a building out in the city. She was getting used to
its presence, not that she had much choice. Still, as long as it only
watched . . . .
It tried to kill
one of the Hero's companions, she thought. It knifed him,
somehow. Or so the logbook claimed.
But . . . what was
that pulsing in the far distance? It was soft . . . yet powerful.
Like a faraway drum. She squeezed her eyes shut, focusing.
"Mistress?"
OreSeur said, suddenly perking up.
Vin snapped her
eyes open. "What?"
"Didn't you
hear that?"
Vin sat up. "Wha—"
Then she picked it out. Footsteps outside the wall a short distance
away. She leaned closer, noticing a dark figure walking down the
street toward the keep. She'd been so focused on her bronze that
she'd completely tuned out real sounds.
"Good job,"
she said, approaching the edge of the guard station's roof. Only then
did she realize something important. OreSeur had taken the
initiative: he'd alerted her of the danger without specifically being
ordered to listen.
It was a small
thing, but it seemed important.
"What do you
think?" she asked quietly, watching the figure approach. He
carried no torch, and he seemed very comfortable in the mists.
"Allomancer?"
OreSeur asked, crouching beside her.
Vin shook her head.
"There's no Allomantic pulse."
"So if he is
one, he's Mistborn," OreSeur said. He still didn't know she
could pierce copperclouds. "He's too tall to be your friend
Zane. Be careful, Mistress."
Vin nodded, dropped
a coin, then threw herself into the mists. Behind her, OreSeur jumped
down from the guardhouse, then leapt off the wall and dropped some
twenty feet to the ground.
He certainly
does like to push the limits of those bones, she thought. Of
course, if a fall couldn't kill him, then she could perhaps
understand his courage.
She guided herself
by Pulling on the nails in a wooden roof, landing just a short
distance from the dark figure. She pulled out her knives and prepared
her metals, making certain she had duralumin. Then she moved quietly
across the street.
Surprise,
she thought. Ham's suggestion still left her nervous. She couldn't
always depend on surprise. She followed the man, studying him. He was
tall—very tall. And in robes. In fact, those robes . . .
Vin stopped short.
"Sazed?" she asked with shock.
The Terrisman
turned, face now visible to her tin-enhanced eyes. He smiled. "Ah,
Lady Vin," he said with his familiar, wise voice. "I was
beginning to wonder how long it would take you to find me. You are—"
He was cut off as
Vin grabbed him in an excited embrace. "I didn't think you were
going to come back so soon!"
"I was not
planning to return, Lady Vin," Sazed said. "But events are
such that I could not avoid this place, I think. Come, we must speak
with His Majesty. I have news of a rather disconcerting nature."
Vin let go, looking
up at his kindly face, noting the tiredness in his eyes. Exhaustion.
His robes were dirty and smelled of ash and sweat. Sazed was usually
very meticulous, even when he traveled. "What is it?" she
asked.
"Problems,
Lady Vin," he said quietly. "Problems and troubles."
The Terris
rejected him, but he came to lead them.





23
"KING LEKAL
CLAIMED THAT HE had twenty thousand of the creatures in his army,"
Sazed said quietly.
Twenty thousand!
Elend thought in shock. That was easily as dangerous as Straff's
fifty thousand men. Probably more so.
The table fell
silent, and Elend glanced at the others. They sat in the palace
kitchen, where a couple of cooks hurriedly prepared a late-night
dinner for Sazed. The white room had an alcove at the side with a
modest table for servant meals. Not surprisingly, Elend had never
dined in the room, but Sazed had insisted that they not wake the
servants it would require to prepare the main dining hall, though he
apparently hadn't eaten all day.
So, they sat on the
low wooden benches, waiting while the cooks worked—far enough
away that they couldn't hear the hushed conversation in the alcove.
Vin sat beside Elend, arm around his waist, her wolfhound kandra on
the floor beside her. Breeze sat on the other side of him, looking
disheveled; he'd been rather annoyed when they'd woken him. Ham had
already been up, as had Elend himself. Another proposal had needed
work—a letter he would send to the Assembly explaining that he
was meeting with Straff informally, rather than in official parlay.
Dockson pulled over
a stool, choosing a place away from Elend, as usual. Clubs sat
slumped on his side of the bench, though Elend couldn't tell if the
posture was from weariness or from general Clubs grumpiness. That
left only Spook, who sat on one of the serving tables a distance
away, legs swinging over the side as he occasionally pilfered a
tidbit of food from the annoyed cooks. He was, Elend noticed with
amusement, flirting quite unsuccessfully with a drowsy kitchen girl.
And then there was
Sazed. The Terrisman sat directly across from Elend with the calm
sense of collectedness that only Sazed could manage. His robes were
dusty, and he looked odd without his earrings—removed to not
tempt thieves, Elend would guess—but his face and hands were
clean. Even dirtied from travel, Sazed still gave off a sense of
tidiness.
"I do
apologize, Your Majesty," Sazed said. "But I do not think
that Lord Lekal is trustworthy. I realize that you were friends with
him before the Collapse, but his current state seems somewhat . . .
unstable."
Elend nodded. "How
is he controlling them, you think?"
Sazed shook his
head. "I cannot guess, Your Majesty."
Ham shook his head.
"I have men in the guard who came up from the South after the
Collapse. They were soldiers, serving in a garrison near a koloss
camp. The Lord Ruler hadn't been dead a day before the creatures went
crazy. They attacked everything in the area—villages,
garrisons, cities."
"The same
happened in the Northwest," Breeze said. "Lord Cett's lands
were being flooded with refugees running from rogue koloss. Cett
tried to recruit the koloss garrison near his own lands, and they
followed him for a time. But then, something set them off, and they
just attacked his army. He had to slaughter the whole lot—and
lost nearly two thousand soldiers killing a small garrison of five
hundred koloss."
The group grew
quiet again, the clacking and talking of the cooking staff sounding a
short distance away. Five hundred koloss killed two thousand men,
Elend thought. And the Jastes force contains twenty thousand of
the beasts. Lord Ruler . . .
"How long?"
said Clubs. "How far away?"
"It took me a
little over a week to get here," Sazed said. "Though it
looked as if King Lekal had been camped there for a time. He is
obviously coming this direction, but I don't know how quickly he
intends to march."
"Probably
wasn't expecting to find that two other armies beat him to the city,"
Ham noted.
Elend nodded. "What
do we do, then?"
"I don't see
that we can do anything, Your Majesty," Dockson said,
shaking his head. "Sazed's report doesn't give me much hope that
we'll be able to reason with Jastes. And, with the siege we're
already under, there is little we can do."
"He might just
turn around and go," Ham said. "With two armies already
here . . . "
Sazed looked
hesitant. "He knew about the armies, Lord Hammond. He seemed to
trust in his koloss over the human armies."
"With twenty
thousand," Clubs said, "he could probably take either
of those other armies."
"But he'd have
trouble with both of them," Ham said. "That would
give me pause, if I were him. By showing up with a pile of volatile
koloss, he could easily worry Cett and Straff enough that they would
join forces against him."
"Which would
suit us just fine," Clubs said. "The more that other
people fight, the better off we are."
Elend sat back. He
felt a looming anxiety, and it was good to have Vin next to him, arm
around him, even if she didn't say much. Sometimes, he felt stronger
simply because of her presence. Twenty thousand koloss. This
single threat scared him more than either of the other armies.
"This could be
a good thing," Ham said. "If Jastes were to lose
control of those beasts near Luthadel, there's a good chance they'd
attack one of those other armies."
"Agreed,"
Breeze said tiredly. "I think we need to keep stalling, draw out
this siege until the koloss army arrives. One more army in the mix
means only more advantage for us."
"I don't like
the idea of koloss in the area," Elend said, shivering slightly.
"No matter what advantage they offer us. If they attack the city
. . . "
"I say we
worry about that when, and if, they arrive," Dockson said. "For
now, we have to continue our plan as we intended. His Majesty meets
with Straff, trying to manipulate him into a covert alliance with us.
With luck, the imminent koloss presence will make him more willing to
deal."
Elend nodded.
Straff had agreed to meet, and they'd set a date for a few days away.
The Assembly was angry that he hadn't consulted with them about the
time and place, but there was little they could do about the matter.
"Anyway,"
Elend finally said, sighing. "You said you had other news, Saze?
Better, hopefully?"
Sazed paused. A
cook finally walked over, setting a plate of food before him: steamed
barley with strips of steak and some spiced lagets. The scents were
enough to make Elend a little hungry. He nodded thankfully to the
palace chef, who had insisted on preparing the meal himself despite
the late hour, and who waved to his staff and began to withdraw.
Sazed sat quietly,
waiting to speak until the staff were again out of earshot. "I
hesitate to mention this, Your Majesty, for your burdens already seem
great."
"You might as
well just tell me," Elend said.
Sazed nodded. "I
fear that we may have exposed the world to something when we killed
the Lord Ruler, Your Majesty. Something unanticipated."
Breeze raised a
tired eyebrow. "Unanticipated? You mean other than ravaging
koloss, power-hungry despots, and bandits?"
Sazed paused. "Um,
yes. I speak of items a little more nebulous, I fear. There is
something wrong with the mists."
Vin perked up
slightly beside Elend. "What do you mean?"
"I have been
following a trail of events," Sazed explained. He looked down as
he spoke, as if embarrassed. "I have been performing an
investigation, you might say. You see, I have heard numerous reports
of the mists coming during the daytime."
Ham shrugged. "That
happens sometimes. There are foggy days, especially in the fall."
"That is not
what I mean, Lord Hammond," Sazed said. "There is a
difference between the mist and ordinary fog. It is difficult to
spot, perhaps, but it is noticeable to a careful eye. The mist is
thicker, and . . . well . . . "
"It moves in
larger patterns," Vin said quietly. "Like rivers in the
sky. It never just hangs in one place; it floats in the breeze,
almost like it makes the breeze."
"And it can't
enter buildings," Clubs said. "Or tents. It evaporates soon
after it does."
"Yes,"
Sazed said. "When I first heard these reports of day mist, I
assumed that the people were just letting their superstitions get out
of control. I have known many skaa who refused to go out on a foggy
morning. However, I was curious about the reports, so I traced them
to a village in the South. I taught there for some time, and never
received confirmation of the stories. So, I made my way from that
place."
He paused, frowning
slightly. "Your Majesty, please do not think me mad. During
those travels I passed a secluded valley, and saw what I swear was
mist, not fog. It was moving across the landscape, creeping toward
me. During the full light of day."
Elend glanced at
Ham. He shrugged. "Don't look at me."
Breeze snorted. "He
was asking your opinion, my dear man."
"Well, I don't
have one."
"Some
philosopher you are."
"I'm not a
philosopher," Ham said. "I just like to think about
things."
"Well, think
about this, then," Breeze said.
Elend glanced at
Sazed. "Have those two always been this way?"
"Honestly, I
am not certain, Your Majesty," Sazed said, smiling slightly. "I
have known them for only slightly longer than yourself."
"Yes, they've
always been like this," Dockson said, sighing quietly. "If
anything, they've gotten worse over the years."
"Aren't you
hungry?" Elend asked, nodding to Sazed's plate.
"I can eat
once our discussion is finished," Sazed said.
"Sazed, you're
not a servant anymore," Vin said. "You don't have to worry
about things like that."
"It is not a
matter of serving or not, Lady Vin," Sazed said. "It is a
matter of being polite."
"Sazed,"
Elend said.
"Yes, Your
Majesty?"
He pointed at the
plate. "Eat. You can be polite another time. Right now, you look
famished—and you're among friends."
Sazed paused,
giving Elend an odd look. "Yes, Your Majesty," he said,
picking up a knife and spoon.
"Now,"
Elend began, "why does it matter if you saw mist during the day?
We know that the things the skaa say aren't true—there's no
reason to fear the mist."
"The skaa may
be more wise than we credit them, Your Majesty," Sazed said,
taking small, careful bites of food. "It appears that the mist
has been killing people."
"What?"
Vin asked, leaning forward.
"I have never
seen it myself, Lady Vin," Sazed said. "But I have seen its
effects, and have collected several separate reports. They all agree
that the mist has been killing people."
"That's
preposterous," Breeze said. "Mist is harmless."
"That is what
I thought, Lord Ladrian," Sazed said. "However, several of
the reports are quite detailed. The incidents always occurred during
the day, and each one tells of the mist curling around some
unfortunate individual, who then died—usually in a seizure. I
gathered interviews with witnesses myself."
Elend frowned. From
another man, he'd dismiss the news. But Sazed . . . he was not a man
that one dismissed. Vin, sitting beside Elend, watched the
conversation with interest, chewing slightly on her bottom lip.
Oddly, she didn't object to Sazed's words—though the others
seemed to be reacting as Breeze had.
"It doesn't
make sense, Saze," Ham said. "Thieves, nobles, and
Allomancers have gone out in the mists for centuries."
"Indeed they
have, Lord Hammond," Sazed said with a nod. "The only
explanation I can think of involves the Lord Ruler. I heard no
substantive reports of mist deaths before the Collapse, but I have
had little trouble finding them since. The reports are concentrated
in the Outer Dominances, but the incidents appear to be moving
inward. I found one . . . very disturbing incident several weeks to
the south, where an entire village seems to have been trapped in
their hovels by the mists."
"But, why
would the Lord Ruler's death have anything to do with the mists?"
Breeze asked.
"I am not
certain, Lord Ladrian," Sazed said. "But it is the only
connection I have been able to hypothesize."
Breeze frowned. "I
wish you wouldn't call me that."
"I apologize,
Lord Breeze," Sazed said. "I am still accustomed to calling
people by their full names."
"Your name is
Ladrian?" Vin asked.
"Unfortunately,"
Breeze said. "I've never been fond of it, and with dear Sazed
putting 'Lord' before it . . . well, the alliteration makes it even
more atrocious."
"Is it me,"
Elend said, "or are we going off on even more tangents than
usual tonight?"
"We get that
way when we're tired," Breeze said with a yawn. "Either
way, our good Terrisman must have his facts wrong. Mist doesn't
kill."
"I can only
report what I have discovered," Sazed said. "I will need to
do some more research."
"So, you'll be
staying?" Vin asked, obviously hopeful.
Sazed nodded.
"What about
teaching?" Breeze asked, waving his hand. "When you left, I
recall that you said something about spending the rest of your life
traveling, or some nonsense like that."
Sazed blushed
slightly, glancing down again. "That duty will have to wait, I
fear."
"You're
welcome to stay as long as you want, Sazed," Elend said,
shooting a glare at Breeze. "If what you say is true, then
you'll be doing a greater service through your studies than you would
by traveling."
"Perhaps,"
Sazed said.
"Though,"
Ham noted with a chuckle, "you probably could have picked a
safer place to set up shop—one that isn't being pushed around
by two armies and twenty thousand koloss."
Sazed smiled, and
Elend gave an obligatory chuckle. He said that the incidents
involving the mist were moving inward, toward the center of the
empire. Toward us.
Something else to
worry about.
"What's going
on?" a voice suddenly asked. Elend turned toward the kitchen
doorway, where a disheveled-looking Allrianne stood. "I heard
voices. Is there a party?"
"We were just
discussing matters of state interest, my dear," Breeze said
quickly.
"The other
girl is here," Allrianne said, pointing at Vin. "Why didn't
you invite me?"
Elend frowned. She
heard voices? The guest quarters aren't anywhere near the kitchens.
And Allrianne was dressed, wearing a simple noblewoman's gown. She'd
taken the time to get out of her sleeping clothing, but she'd left
her hair disheveled. Perhaps to make herself look more innocent?
I'm starting to
think like Vin, Elend told himself with a sigh. As if to
corroborate his thoughts, he noticed Vin narrowing her eyes at the
new girl.
"Go back to
your rooms, dear," Breeze said soothingly. "Don't trouble
His Majesty."
Allrianne sighed
dramatically, but turned and did as he asked, trailing off into the
hallway. Elend turned back to Sazed, who was watching the girl with a
curious expression. Elend gave him an "ask later" look, and
the Terrisman turned back to his meal. A few moments later, the group
began to break up. Vin hung back with Elend as the others left.
"I don't trust
that girl," Vin said as a couple of servants took Sazed's pack
and guided him away.
Elend smiled,
turning to look down at Vin. "Do I have to say it?"
She rolled her
eyes. "I know. 'You don't trust anyone, Vin.' This time I'm
right. She was dressed, but her hair was disheveled. She must have
done that intentionally."
"I noticed."
"You did?"
She sounded impressed.
Elend nodded. "She
must have heard the servants waking up Breeze and Clubs, so she got
up. That means she spent a good half an hour eavesdropping. She kept
her hair mussed so that we'd assume that she'd just come down."
Vin opened her
mouth slightly, then frowned, studying him. "You're getting
better," she eventually said.
"Either that,
or Miss Allrianne just isn't very good."
Vin smiled.
"I'm still
trying to figure out why you didn't hear her," Elend noted.
"The cooks,"
Vin said. "Too much noise. Besides, I was a little distracted by
what Sazed was saying."
"And what do
you think of it?"
Vin paused. "I'll
tell you later."
"All right,"
Elend said. To Vin's side, the kandra rose and stretched its
wolfhound body. Why did she insist on bringing OreSeur to the
meeting? he wondered. Wasn't it just a few weeks ago that she
couldn't stand the thing?
The wolfhound
turned, glancing at the kitchen windows. Vin followed its gaze.
"Going back
out?" Elend asked.
Vin nodded. "I
don't trust this night. I'll stay near your balcony, in case there's
trouble."
She kissed him;
then she moved away. He watched her go, wondering why she had been so
interested in Sazed's stories, wondering what it was she wasn't
telling him.
Stop it, he
told himself. Perhaps he was learning her lessons a little too
well—of all the people in the palace, Vin was the last one he
needed to be paranoid about. However, every time he felt like he was
beginning to figure Vin out, he realized just how little he
understood her.
And that made
everything else seem a little more depressing. With a sigh, he turned
to seek out his rooms, where his half-finished letter to the Assembly
waited to be completed.
Perhaps I should
not have spoken of the mists, Sazed thought, following a servant
up the stairs. Now I've troubled the king about something that
might just be my delusion.
They reached the
top of the stairs, and the servant asked if he wished a bath drawn.
Sazed shook his head. In most other circumstances he would have
welcomed the opportunity to get clean. However, running all the way
to the Central Dominance, being captured by the koloss, then marching
the rest of the way up to Luthadel had left him wearied to the
farthest fringe of exhaustion. He'd barely had the strength to eat.
Now he just wanted to sleep.
The servant nodded
and led Sazed down a side corridor.
What if he was
imagining connections that didn't exist? Every scholar knew that one
of the greatest dangers in research was the desire to find a specific
answer. He had not imagined the testimonies he had taken, but had he
exaggerated their importance? What did he really have? The words of a
frightened man who had seen his friend die of a seizure? The
testimony of a lunatic, crazed to the point of cannibalism? The fact
remained that Sazed himself had never seen the mists kill.
The servant led him
to a guest chamber, and Sazed thankfully bid the man good night. He
watched the man walk away, holding only a candle, his lamp left for
Sazed to use. During most of Sazed's life, he had belonged to a class
of servants prized for their refined sense of duty and decorum. He'd
been in charge of households and manors, supervising servants just
like the one who had led him to his rooms.
Another life,
he thought. He had always been a little frustrated that his duties as
a steward had left him little time for study. How ironic it was that
he should help overthrow the Final Empire, then find himself with
even less time.
He reached to push
open the door, and froze almost immediately. There was already a
light inside the room.
Did they leave a
lamp on for me? he wondered. He slowly pushed the door open.
Someone was waiting for him.
"Tindwyl,"
Sazed said quietly. She sat beside the room's writing desk, collected
and neatly dressed, as always.
"Sazed,"
she replied as he stepped in, shutting the door. Suddenly, he was
even more acutely aware of his dirty robes.
"You responded
to my request," he said.
"And you
ignored mine."
Sazed didn't meet
her eyes. He walked over, setting his lamp on top of the room's
bureau. "I noticed the king's new clothing, and he appears to
have gained a bearing to match them. You have done well, I think."
"We are only
just started," she said dismissively. "You were right about
him."
"King Venture
is a very good man," Sazed said, walking to the washbasin to
wipe down his face. He welcomed the cold water; dealing with Tindwyl
was bound to tire him even further.
"Good men can
make terrible kings," Tindwyl noted.
"But bad men
cannot make good kings," Sazed said. "It is better to start
with a good man and work on the rest, I think."
"Perhaps,"
Tindwyl said. She watched him with her normal hard expression. Others
thought her cold—harsh, even. But Sazed had never seen that in
her. Considering what she had been through, he found it
remarkable—amazing, even—that she was so confident. Where
did she get it?
"Sazed, Sazed
. . . " she said. "Why did you return to the Central
Dominance? You know the directions the Synod gave you. You are
supposed to be in the Eastern Dominance, teaching the people on the
borders of the burnlands."
"That is where
I was," Sazed said. "And now I am here. The South will get
along for a time without me, I think."
"Oh?"
Tindwyl asked. "And who will teach them irrigation techniques,
so they can produce enough food to survive the cold months? Who will
explain to them basic lawmaking principles so that they may govern
themselves? Who will show them how to reclaim their lost faiths and
beliefs? You were always so passionate about that."
Sazed set down the
washcloth. "I will return to teach them when I am certain there
is not a greater work I need to do."
"What greater
work could there be?" Tindwyl demanded. "This is our life's
duty, Sazed. This is the work of our entire people. I know
that Luthadel is important to you, but there is nothing for you here.
I will care for your king. You must go."
"I appreciate
your work with King Venture," Sazed said. "My course has
little to do with him, however. I have other research to do."
Tindwyl frowned,
eyeing him with a cool stare. "You're still looking for this
phantom connection of yours. This foolishness with the mists."
"There is
something wrong, Tindwyl," he said.
"No,"
Tindwyl said, sighing. "Can't you see, Sazed? You spent ten
years working to overthrow the Final Empire. Now, you can't content
yourself with regular work, so you have invented some grand threat to
the land. You're afraid of being irrelevant."
Sazed looked down.
"Perhaps. If you are correct, then I will seek the forgiveness
of the Synod. I should probably seek it anyway, I think."
"Oh, Sazed,"
Tindwyl said, shaking her head slightly. "I can't understand
you. It makes sense when young fire-heads like Vedzan and Rindel buck
the Synod's advice. But you? You are the soul of what it means to be
Terris—so calm, so humble, so careful and respectful. So wise.
Why are you the one who consistently defies our leaders? It doesn't
make sense."
"I am not so
wise as you think, Tindwyl," Sazed said quietly. "I am
simply a man who must do as he believes. Right now, I believe there
to be a danger in the mists, and I must investigate my impressions.
Perhaps it is simply arrogance and foolishness. But I would rather be
known as arrogant and foolish than risk danger to the people of this
land."
"You will find
nothing."
"Then I will
be proven wrong," Sazed said. He turned, looking into her eyes.
"But kindly remember that the last time I disobeyed the Synod,
the result was the collapse of the Final Empire and the freedom of
our people."
Tindwyl made a
tight-lipped frown. She didn't like being reminded of that fact—none
of the Keepers did. They held that Sazed had been wrong to disobey,
but they couldn't very well punish him for his success.
"I don't
understand you," she repeated quietly. "You should be a
leader among our people, Sazed. Not our greatest rebel and dissident.
Everyone wants to look up to you—but they can't. Must you defy
every order you are given?"
He smiled wanly,
but did not answer.
Tindwyl sighed,
rising. She walked toward the door, but paused, taking his hand as
she passed. She looked into his eyes for a moment; then he removed
the hand.
She shook her head
and left.
He commanded
kings, and though he sought no empire, he became greater than all who
had come before.





24
SOMETHING IS GOING
ON, VIN thought, sitting in the mists atop Keep Venture.
Sazed was not prone
to exaggeration. He was meticulous—that much showed in his
mannerisms, his cleanliness, and even the way he spoke. And, he was
even more meticulous when it came to his studies. Vin was inclined to
believe his discoveries.
And she'd certainly
seen things in the mists. Dangerous things. Could the mist spirit
explain the deaths Sazed had encountered? But, if that's the case,
why didn't Sazed speak of figures in the mist?
She sighed, closing
her eyes and burning bronze. She could hear the spirit, watching
nearby. And, she could hear it again as well, the strange
thumping in the distance. She opened her eyes, leaving her bronze on,
and quietly unfolded something from her pocket: a sheet from the
logbook. By the light from Elend's balcony below, and with tin, she
could easily read the words.
I
sleep but a few hours each night. We must press forward, traveling as
much as we can each day—but when I finally lie down, I find
sleep elusive. The same thoughts that trouble me during the day are
only compounded by the stillness of night.
And,
above it all, I hear the thumping sounds from above, the pulsings
from the mountains. Drawing me closer with each beat.
She shivered. She
had asked one of Elend's seekers to burn bronze, and he had claimed
to hear nothing from the north. Either he was the kandra, lying to
her about his ability to burn bronze, or Vin could hear a rhythm that
nobody else could. Nobody except a man a thousand years dead.
A man everyone had
assumed was the Hero of Ages.
You're being
silly, she told herself, refolding the paper. Jumping to
conclusions. To her side, OreSeur rustled, lying quietly and
staring out over the city.
And yet, she kept
thinking of Sazed's words. Something was happening with the mists.
Something was wrong.
Zane didn't find
her atop Keep Hasting.
He stopped in the
mists, standing quietly. He'd expected to find her waiting, for this
was the place of their last fight. Even thinking of the event made
him tense with anticipation.
During the months
of sparring, they had always met again at the place where he'd
eventually lost her. Yet, he'd returned to this location on several
nights, and had never found her. He frowned, thinking of Straff's
orders, and of necessity.
Eventually, he
would likely be ordered to kill this girl. He wasn't certain what
bothered him more—his growing reluctance to consider such an
act, or his growing worry that he might not actually be able to beat
her.
She could be it,
he thought. The thing that finally lets me resist. The thing that
convinces me to just . . . leave.
He couldn't explain
why he needed a reason. Part of him simply ascribed it to his
insanity, though the rational part of him felt that was a weak
excuse. Deep down, he admitted that Straff was all he had ever known.
Zane wouldn't be able to leave until he knew he had someone else to
rely on.
He turned away from
Keep Hasting. He'd had enough of waiting; it was time to seek her
out. Zane threw a coin, bounding across the city for a time. And,
sure enough, there she was: sitting atop Keep Venture, watching over
his foolish brother.
Zane rounded the
keep, keeping far enough away that even tin-enhanced eyes wouldn't
see him. He landed on the back of the keep's roof, then walked
forward quietly. He approached, watching her sit on the edge of the
roof. The air was silent.
Finally, she turned
around, jumping slightly. He swore that she could sense him when she
shouldn't be able to.
Either way, he was
discovered.
"Zane,"
Vin said flatly, easily identifying the silhouette. He wore his
customary black on black, with no mistcloak.
"I've been
waiting," he said quietly. "Atop Keep Hasting. Hoping you'd
come."
She sighed, careful
to keep an eye on him, but relaxing slightly. "I'm not really in
the mood for sparring right now."
He watched her.
"Pity," he finally said. He walked over, prompting Vin to
rise cautiously to her feet. He paused beside the lip of the rooftop,
looking down at Elend's lit balcony.
Vin glanced at
OreSeur. He was tense, alternately watching her and Zane.
"You're so
worried about him," Zane said quietly.
"Elend?"
Vin asked.
Zane nodded. "Even
though he uses you."
"We've had
this discussion, Zane. He isn't using me."
Zane looked up at
her, meeting her eyes, standing straight-backed and confident in the
night.
He's so strong,
she thought. So sure of himself. So different from . . .
She stopped
herself.
Zane turned away.
"Tell me, Vin," he said, "when you were younger, did
you ever wish for power?"
Vin cocked her
head, frowning at the strange question. "What do you mean?"
"You grew up
on the streets," Zane said. "When you were younger, did you
wish for power? Did you dream of having the ability to free yourself,
to kill those who brutalized you?"
"Of course I
did," Vin said.
"And now you
have that power," Zane said. "What would the child Vin say
if she could see you? A Mistborn who is bent and bowed by the weight
of another's will? Powerful, yet somehow still subservient?"
"I'm a
different person now, Zane," Vin said. "I'd like to think
that I've learned things since I was a child."
"I've found
that a child's instincts are often the most honest," Zane said.
"The most natural."
Vin didn't respond.
Zane turned
quietly, looking out over the city, seemingly unconcerned that he was
exposing his back to her. Vin eyed him, then dropped a coin. It
plinked against the metal rooftop, and he immediately glanced back
toward her.
No, she
thought, he doesn't trust me.
He turned away
again, and Vin watched him. She did understand what he meant, for she
had once thought as he did. Idly, she wondered what kind of person
she might have become if she'd gained full access to her powers
without—at the same time—learning of friendship and trust
from Kelsier's crew.
"What would
you do, Vin?" Zane asked, turning back toward her. "Assuming
you didn't have any constraints—assuming there were no
repercussions for your actions?"
Go north.
The thought was immediate. Find out what is causing that thumping.
She didn't say it, however. "I don't know," she said
instead.
He turned, eyeing
her. "You aren't taking me seriously, I see. I apologize for
wasting your time."
He turned to go,
walking directly between her and OreSeur. Vin watched him, and felt a
sudden stab of concern. He'd come to her, willing to talk rather than
just fight—and she'd wasted the opportunity. She was never
going to turn him to her side if she didn't talk to him.
"You want to
know what I'd do?" she asked, her voice ringing in the silent
mists.
Zane paused.
"If I could
just use my power as I wanted?" Vin asked. "No
repercussions? I'd protect him."
"Your king?"
Zane asked, turning.
Vin nodded sharply.
"These men who brought armies against him—your master,
this man named Cett. I'd kill them. I'd use my power to make certain
that nobody could threaten Elend."
Zane nodded
quietly, and she saw respect in his eyes. "And why don't you?"
"Because . . .
"
"I see the
confusion in your eyes," Zane said. "You know that your
instincts to kill those men are right—yet you hold back.
Because of him."
"There would
be repercussions, Zane," Vin said. "If I killed those men,
their armies might just attack. Right now, diplomacy could still
work."
"Perhaps,"
Zane said. "Until he asks you to go kill someone for
him."
Vin snorted. "Elend
doesn't work that way. He doesn't give me orders, and the only people
I kill are the ones who try to kill him first."
"Oh?"
Zane said. "You may not act at his order, Vin, but you certainly
refrain from action at it. You are his toy. I don't say this to
insult you—you see, I'm as much a toy as you are. Neither of us
can break free. Not alone."
Suddenly, the coin
Vin had dropped snapped into the air, flying toward Zane. She tensed,
but it simply streaked into Zane's waiting hand.
"It's
interesting," he said, turning the coin in his fingers. "Many
Mistborn stop seeing the value in coins. To us, they simply become
something to be used for jumping. It's easy to forget the value of
something when you use it so often. When it becomes commonplace and
convenient to you. When it becomes . . . just a tool."
He flipped the coin
up, then shot it out into the night. "I must go," he said,
turning.
Vin raised a hand.
Seeing him use Allomancy made her realize that there was another
reason she wanted to speak with him. It had been so long since she'd
talked with another Mistborn, one who understood her powers. Someone
like her.
But, it seemed to
her that she was too desperate for him to stay. So she let him go,
and returned to her vigil.
He fathered no
children, yet all of the land became his progeny.





25
VIN WAS A VERY
LIGHT sleeper—a heritage from her youth. Thieving crews worked
together out of necessity, and any man who couldn't guard his own
possessions was considered to be unworthy of them. Vin, of course,
had been at the very bottom of the hierarchy—and while she
hadn't had many possessions to protect, being a young girl in a
primarily male environment gave her other reasons to be a light
sleeper.
So it was that when
she awoke to a quiet bark of warning, she reacted without thinking.
She tossed off her covers, reaching immediately for the vial on her
bedstand. She didn't sleep with metals inside of her; many of the
Allomantic metals were, to some small extent, poisonous. It was
unavoidable that she'd have to deal with some of that danger, but she
had been warned to burn away excess metals at the end of each day.
She downed this
vial even as she reached for the obsidian daggers hidden beneath her
pillow. The door to her sleeping chamber swung open, and Tindwyl
walked in. The Terriswoman froze in midstep as she saw Vin crouching
on the bed's footboard a few feet away, twin daggers glistening, body
tense.
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow. "So you are awake."
"Now."
The Terriswoman
smiled.
"What are you
doing in my rooms?" Vin demanded.
"I came to
wake you. I thought we might go shopping."
"Shopping?"
"Yes, dear,"
Tindwyl said, walking over to pull open the curtains. It was far
earlier in the day than Vin usually rose. "From what I hear,
you're going to meet with His Majesty's father on the morrow. You'll
want a suitable dress for the occasion, I assume?"
"I don't wear
dresses anymore." What is your game?
Tindwyl turned,
eyeing Vin. "You sleep in your clothing?"
Vin nodded.
"You don't
keep any ladies-in-waiting?"
Vin shook her head.
"Very well,
then," Tindwyl said, turning to walk from the room. "Bathe
and change. We'll leave when you're ready."
"I don't take
commands from you."
Tindwyl paused by
the door, turning. Then her face softened. "I know you don't,
child. You may come with me if you wish—the choice is yours.
However, do you really want to meet with Straff Venture in trousers
and a shirt?"
Vin hesitated.
"At least come
browse," Tindwyl said. "It will help take your mind off
things."
Finally, Vin
nodded. Tindwyl smiled again, then left.
Vin glanced at
OreSeur, who sat beside her bed. "Thanks for the warning."
The kandra
shrugged.
Once, Vin wouldn't
have been able to imagine living in a place like Keep Venture. The
young Vin had been accustomed to hidden lairs, skaa hovels, and the
occasional alley. Now she lived in a building bespeckled with stained
glass, bounded by mighty walls and grand archways.
Of course,
Vin thought as she left the stairwell, many things have happened
that I didn't expect. Why think about them now?
Her youth in the
thieving crews had been much on her mind of late, and Zane's
comments—ridiculous though they were—itched in her mind.
Did Vin belong in a place like this keep? She had a great many
skills, but few of them were beautiful hallway kinds of skills. They
were more . . . ash-stained alleyway kinds of skills.
She sighed, OreSeur
at her side as she made her way to the southern entryway, where
Tindwyl said she'd be waiting. The hallway here grew wide and grand,
and opened directly into the courtyard. Usually, coaches came right
up into the entryway to pick up their occupants—that way the
noblemen wouldn't be exposed to the elements.
As she approached,
her tin let her hear voices. One was Tindwyl, the other . . .
"I didn't
bring much," Allrianne said. "A couple hundred boxings. But
I do so need something to wear. I can't survive on borrowed
gowns forever!"
Vin paused as she
turned into the last part of the hallway.
"The king's
gift will surely be enough to pay for a dress, dear," Tindwyl
said, noticing Vin. "Ah, here she is."
A sullen-looking
Spook stood with the two women. He had on his palace guard's uniform,
though he wore the jacket undone and the trousers loose. Vin walked
forward slowly. "I wasn't expecting company," she said.
"Young
Allrianne was trained as a courtly noblewoman," Tindwyl said.
"She will know the current fashions, and will be able to advise
on your purchases."
"And Spook?"
Tindwyl turned,
eyeing the boy. "Packman."
Well, that
explains his mood, Vin thought.
"Come,"
Tindwyl said, walking toward the courtyard. Allrianne followed
quickly, walking with a light, graceful step. Vin glanced at Spook,
who shrugged, and they followed as well.
"How did you
get pulled into this?" Vin whispered to Spook.
"Was up too
early, sneaking food," Spook grumbled. "Miss Imposing there
noticed me, smiled like a wolfhound, and said, 'We'll be needing your
services this afternoon, young man.'"
Vin nodded. "Stay
alert and keep your tin burning. Remember, we're at war."
Spook obediently
did what she said. Standing close to him as she was, Vin easily
picked up and identified his tin's Allomantic pulses—meaning he
wasn't the spy.
Another one off
the list, Vin thought. At least this trip won't be a total
waste.
A coach waited for
them by the front keep gates. Spook climbed up beside the coachman,
and the women piled into the back. Vin sat down inside, and OreSeur
climbed in and took the seat next to her. Allrianne and Tindwyl sat
across from her, and Allrianne eyed OreSeur with a frown, wrinkling
her nose. "Does the animal have to sit on the seats with us?"
"Yes,"
Vin said as the carriage started moving.
Allrianne obviously
expected more of an explanation, but Vin didn't give one. Finally,
Allrianne turned to look out the window. "Are you sure we'll be
safe, traveling with only one manservant, Tindwyl?"
Tindwyl eyed Vin.
"Oh, I think that we'll be all right."
"Oh, that's
right," Allrianne said, looking back at Vin. "You're an
Allomancer! Are the things they say true?"
"What things?"
Vin asked quietly.
"Well, they
say you killed the Lord Ruler, for one. And that you're kind of . . .
um . . . well." Allrianne bit her lip. "Well, just a little
bit rickety."
"Rickety?"
"And
dangerous," Allrianne said. "But, well, that can't be true.
I mean, you're going shopping with us, right?"
Is she trying to
provoke me on purpose?
"Do you always
wear clothing like that?" Allrianne asked.
Vin was in her
standard gray trousers and tan shirt. "It's easy to fight in."
"Yes, but . .
. well." Allrianne smiled. "I guess that's why we're here
today, right, Tindwyl?"
"Yes, dear,"
Tindwyl said. She'd been studying Vin through the entire
conversation.
Like what you
see? Vin thought. What is it you want?
"You have to
be the strangest noblewoman I've ever met," Allrianne declared.
"Did you grow up far from court? I did, but my mother was quite
certain to train me well. Of course, she was just trying to make me
into a good catch so Father could auction me off to make an
alliance."
Allrianne smiled.
It had been a while since Vin had been forced to deal with women like
her. She remembered hours spent at court, smiling, pretending to be
Valette Renoux. Often when she thought of those days, she remembered
the bad things. The spite she'd faced from court members, her own
lack of comfort in the role.
But, there had also
been good things. Elend was one. She would never have met him if she
hadn't been pretending to be a noblewoman. And the balls—with
their colors, their music, and their gowns—had held a certain
transfixing charm. The graceful dancing, the careful interactions,
the perfectly decorated rooms . . .
Those things are
gone now, she told herself. We don't have time for silly balls
and gatherings, not when the dominance is on the verge of collapse.
Tindwyl was still
watching her.
"Well?"
Allrianne asked.
"What?"
Vin asked.
"Did you grow
up far from court?"
"I'm not
noble, Allrianne. I'm skaa."
Allrianne paled,
then flushed, then raised her fingers to her lips. "Oh! You poor
thing!" Vin's augmented ears heard something beside her—a
light chuckling from OreSeur, soft enough that only an Allomancer
could have heard him.
She resisted the
urge to shoot the kandra a flat look. "It wasn't so bad,"
she said.
"But, well, no
wonder you don't know how to dress!" Allrianne said.
"I know how to
dress," Vin said. "I even own a few gowns." Not
that I've put one on in months . . . .
Allrianne nodded,
though she obviously didn't believe Vin's comment. "Breezy is
skaa, too," she said quietly. "Or, half skaa. He told me.
Good thing he didn't tell Father—Father never has been very
nice to skaa."
Vin didn't reply.
Eventually, they
reached Kenton Street, and the crowds made the carriage a liability.
Vin climbed out first, OreSeur hopping down to the cobblestones
beside her. The market street was busy, though not as packed as it
had been the last time she'd visited. Vin glanced over the prices at
some nearby shops as the others exited the coach.
Five boxings for
a bin of aging apples, Vin thought with dissatisfaction. Food
is already going at a premium. Elend had stores, fortunately. But
how long would they last before the siege? Not through the
approaching winter, certainly—not with so much of the
dominance's grain still unharvested in the outer plantations.
Time may be our
friend now, Vin thought, but it will turn on us eventually.
They had to get those armies to fight each other. Otherwise, the
city's people might die of starvation before the soldiers even tried
to take the walls.
Spook hopped down
from the carriage, joining them as Tindwyl surveyed the street. Vin
eyed the bustling crowds. The people were obviously trying to go
about their daily activities, despite the threat from outside. What
else could they do? The siege had already lasted for weeks. Life had
to go on.
"There,"
Tindwyl said, pointing to a dressmaker's shop.
Allrianne scampered
forward. Tindwyl followed behind, walking with modest decorum. "Eager
young thing, isn't she?" the Terriswoman asked.
Vin shrugged. The
blond noblewoman had already gotten Spook's attention; he was
following her with a lively step. Of course, it wasn't hard to get
Spook's attention. You just had to have breasts and smell nice—and
the second was sometimes optional.
Tindwyl smiled.
"She probably hasn't had an opportunity to go shopping since she
left with her father's army weeks ago."
"You sound
like you think she went through some awful ordeal," Vin said.
"Just because she couldn't go shopping."
"She obviously
enjoys it," Tindwyl said. "Surely you can understand being
taken from that which you love."
Vin shrugged as
they reached the shop. "I have trouble feeling sympathy for a
courtly puff who is tragically taken from her dresses."
Tindwyl frowned
slightly as they entered the shop, OreSeur settling down to wait
outside. "Do not be so hard on the child. She is a product of
her upbringing, just as you are. If you judge her worth based on
frivolities, then you are doing the same as those who judge you based
on your simple clothing."
"I like it
when people judge me based on my simple clothing," Vin said.
"Then they don't expect too much."
"I see,"
Tindwyl said. "Then, you haven't missed this at all?" She
nodded toward the shop's inner room.
Vin paused. The
room burst with colors and fabric, lace and velvet, bodices and
skirts. Everything was powdered with a light perfume. Standing before
the dressing dummies in their brilliant hues, Vin was—for just
a moment—again taken back to the balls. Back to when she was
Valette. Back to when she had an excuse to be Valette.
"They say you
enjoyed noble society," Tindwyl said lightly, walking forward.
Allrianne was already standing near the front of the room, running
her fingers across a bolt of fabric, talking to the dressmaker in a
firm voice.
"Who told you
that?" Vin asked.
Tindwyl turned
back. "Why, your friends, dear. It's quite curious—they
say you stopped wearing dresses a few months after the Collapse. They
all wonder why. They say you seemed to like dressing like a woman,
but I guess they were wrong."
"No," Vin
said quietly. "They were right."
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow, pausing beside a dressmaker's dummy in a bright green dress,
edged with lace, the bottom flaring wide with several underskirts.
Vin approached,
looking up at the gorgeous costume. "I was beginning to like
dressing like this. That was the problem."
"I don't see a
problem in that, dear."
Vin turned away
from the gown. "This isn't me. It never was—it was just an
act. When wearing a dress like that, it's too easy to forget who you
really are."
"And these
dresses can't be part of who you really are?"
Vin shook her head.
"Dresses and gowns are part of who she is." She
nodded toward Allrianne. "I need to be something else. Something
harder." I shouldn't have come here.
Tindwyl laid a hand
on Vin's shoulder. "Why haven't you married him, child?"
Vin looked up
sharply. "What kind of question is that?"
"An honest
one," Tindwyl said. She seemed far less harsh than she had been
the other times Vin had met her. Of course, during those times, she
had mostly been addressing Elend.
"That topic is
not your concern," Vin said.
"The king has
asked me to help him improve his image," Tindwyl said. "And
I have taken it upon myself to do more than that—I want to make
a real king of him, if I can. There is some great potential in him, I
think. However, he's not going to be able to realize it until he's
more sure about certain things in his life. You in particular."
"I . . . "
Vin closed her eyes, remembering his marriage proposal. That night,
on the balcony, ash lightly falling in the night. She remembered her
terror. She'd known, of course, where the relationship was going. Why
had she been so frightened?
That was the day
she'd stopped wearing dresses.
"He shouldn't
have asked me," Vin said quietly, opening her eyes. "He
can't marry me."
"He loves you,
child," Tindwyl said. "In a way, that is unfortunate—this
would all be much easier if he could feel otherwise. However, as
things stand . . . "
Vin shook her head.
"I'm wrong for him."
"Ah,"
Tindwyl said. "I see."
"He needs
something else," Vin said. "Something better. A woman who
can be a queen, not just a bodyguard. Someone . . . " Vin's
stomach twisted. "Someone more like her."
Tindwyl glanced
toward Allrianne, who laughed at a comment made by the elderly
dressmaker as he took her measurements.
"You are the
one he fell in love with, child," Tindwyl said.
"When I was
pretending to be like her."
Tindwyl smiled.
"Somehow, I doubt that you could be like Allrianne, no matter
how hard you practiced."
"Perhaps,"
Vin said. "Either way, it was my courtly performance that he
loved. He didn't know what I really was."
"And has he
abandoned you now that he does know of it?"
"Well, no.
But—"
"All people
are more complex than they first appear," Tindwyl said.
"Allrianne, for instance, is eager and young—perhaps a bit
too outspoken. But she knows more of the court than many would
expect, and she seems to know how to recognize what is good in a
person. That is a talent many lack.
"Your king is
a humble scholar and thinker, but he has the will of a warrior. He is
a man who has the nerve to fight, and I think—perhaps—you
have yet to see the best of him. The Soother Breeze is a cynical,
mocking man—until he looks at young Allrianne. Then he softens,
and one wonders how much of his harsh unconcern is an act."
Tindwyl paused,
looking at Vin. "And you. You are so much more than you are
willing to accept, child. Why look at only one side of yourself, when
your Elend sees so much more?"
"Is that what
this is all about?" Vin said. "You trying to turn me into a
queen for Elend?"
"No, child,"
Tindwyl said. "I wish to help you turn into whoever you are.
Now, go let the man take your measurements so you can try on some
stock dresses."
Whoever I am?
Vin thought, frowning. However, she let the tall Terriswoman push her
forward, and the elderly dressmaker took his tape and began to
measure.
A few moments and a
changing room later, Vin stepped back into the room wearing a memory.
Silky blue with white lace, the gown was tight at the waist and
through the bust, but had a large, flowing bottom. The numerous
skirts made it flare out, tapering down in a triangular shape, her
feet completely covered, the bottom of the skirt flush with the
floor.
It was terribly
impractical. It rustled when she moved, and she had to be careful
where she stepped to keep it from catching or brushing a dirty
surface. But it was beautiful, and it made her feel beautiful. She
almost expected a band to start playing, Sazed to stand over her
shoulder like a protective sentry, and Elend to appear in the
distance, lounging and watching couples dance as he flipped through a
book.
Vin walked forward,
letting the dressmaker watch where the garment pinched and where it
bunched, and Allrianne let out an "Ooo" as she saw Vin. The
old dressmaker leaned on his cane, dictating notes to a young
assistant. "Move around a bit more, my lady," he requested.
"Let me see how it fits when you do more than just walk in a
straight line."
Vin spun slightly,
turning on one foot, trying to remember the dancing moves Sazed had
taught her.
I never did get
to dance with Elend, she realized, stepping to the side, as if to
music she could only faintly remember. He always found an excuse
to wiggle out of it.
She twirled,
getting a feel for the dress. She would have thought that her
instincts would have decayed. Now that she had one on again, however,
she was surprised at how easy it was to fall back into those
habits—stepping lightly, turning so that the bottom of the
dress flared just a bit . . . .
She paused. The
dressmaker was no longer dictating. He watched her quietly, smiling.
"What?"
Vin asked, flushing.
"I'm sorry, my
lady," he said, turning to tap on his assistant's notebook,
sending the boy away with a point of his finger. "But I don't
rightly think I've ever seen someone move so gracefully. Like a . . .
passing breath."
"You flatter
me," Vin said.
"No, child,"
Tindwyl said, standing to the side. "He's right. You move with a
grace that most women can only envy."
The dressmaker
smiled again, turning as his assistant approached with a group of
square cloth color samples. The old man began to sort through them
with a wizened hand, and Vin stepped over to Tindwyl, holding her
hands at the sides, trying not to let the traitorous dress take
control of her again.
"Why are you
being so nice to me?" Vin demanded quietly.
"Why shouldn't
I be?" Tindwyl asked.
"Because
you're mean to Elend," Vin said. "Don't deny it—I've
listened in on your lessons. You spend the time insulting and
disparaging him. But now you're pretending to be nice."
Tindwyl smiled. "I
am not pretending, child."
"Then why are
you so mean to Elend?"
"The lad grew
up as a pampered son of a great lord," Tindwyl said. "Now
that he's king, he needs a little harsh truth, I think." She
paused, glancing down at Vin. "I sense that you've had quite
enough of that in your life."
The dressmaker
approached with his swatches, spreading them out on a low table.
"Now, my lady," he said, tapping one group with a bent
finger. "I think your coloring would look particularly good with
dark cloth. A nice maroon, perhaps?"
"What about a
black?" Vin asked.
"Heavens, no,"
Tindwyl said. "Absolutely no more black or gray for you, child."
"What about
this one, then?" Vin asked, pulling out a royal blue swatch. It
was nearly the shade she'd worn the first night she'd met Elend, so
long ago.
"Ah, yes,"
the dressmaker said. "That would look wonderful against that
light skin and dark hair. Hum, yes. Now, we'll have to pick a style.
You need this by tomorrow evening, the Terriswoman said?"
Vin nodded.
"Ah, then.
We'll have to modify one of the stock dresses, but I think I have one
in this color. We'll have to take it in quite a bit, but we can work
through the night for a beauty like yourself, can't we, lad? Now, as
for the style . . . "
"This is fine,
I guess," Vin said, looking down. The gown was the standard cut
of those she'd worn at previous balls.
"Well, we're
not looking for 'fine,' now, are we?" the dressmaker said with a
smile.
"What if we
removed some of the pettiskirts?" Tindwyl said, pulling at the
sides of Vin's dress. "And perhaps raised the hem just a bit, so
that she could move more freely?"
Vin paused. "You
could do that?"
"Of course,"
the dressmaker said. "The lad says thinner skirts are more
popular to the south, though they tend to lag in fashion a bit behind
Luthadel." He paused. "Though, I don't know that Luthadel
even really has a fashion anymore . . . ."
"Make cuffs of
the sleeves wide," Tindwyl said. "And sew a couple of
pockets into them for certain personal items."
The old man nodded
as his quiet assistant scribbled down the suggestion.
"The chest and
waist can be tight," Tindwyl continued, "but not
restrictive. Lady Vin needs to be able to move freely."
The old man paused.
"Lady Vin?" he asked. He looked a little closer at Vin,
squinting, then turned to his assistant. The boy nodded quietly.
"I see . . . "
the man said, paling, hand shaking just a little bit more. He placed
it on the top of his cane, as if to give himself a little more
stability. "I'm . . . I'm sorry if I offended you, my lady. I
didn't know."
Vin flushed again.
Another reason why I shouldn't go shopping. "No,"
she said, reassuring the man. "It's all right. You haven't
offended me."
He relaxed
slightly, and Vin noticed Spook strolling over.
"Looks like
we've been found," Spook said, nodding to the front windows.
Vin glanced past
dressing dummies and bales of cloth to see a crowd gathering outside.
Tindwyl watched Vin with curiosity.
Spook shook his
head. "Why do you get to be so popular?"
"I killed
their god," Vin said quietly, ducking around a dressing dummy,
hiding from the dozens of peeking eyes.
"I helped
too," Spook said. "I even got my nickname from Kelsier
himself! But nobody cares about poor little Spook."
Vin scanned the
room for windows. There's got to be a back door. Of course, there
might be people in the alley.
"What are you
doing?" Tindwyl asked.
"I have to
go," Vin said. "Get away from them."
"Why don't you
go out and talk to them?" Tindwyl asked. "They're obviously
very interested in seeing you."
Allrianne emerged
from a dressing room—wearing a gown of yellow and blue—and
twirled dramatically. She was obviously put out when she didn't even
get Spook's attention.
"I'm not going
out there," Vin said. "Why would I want to do something
like that?"
"They need
hope," Tindwyl said. "Hope you can give them."
"A false
hope," Vin said. "I'd only encourage them to think of me as
some object of worship."
"That's not
true," Allrianne said suddenly, walking forward, looking out the
windows without the least bit of embarrassment. "Hiding in
corners, wearing strange clothing, and being mysterious—that's
what has gotten you this amazing reputation. If people knew how
ordinary you were, they wouldn't be so crazy to get a look at you."
She paused, then looked back. "I . . . uh, didn't mean that like
I think it sounded."
Vin flushed. "I'm
not Kelsier, Tindwyl. I don't want people to worship me. I just want
to be left alone."
"Some people
don't have that choice, child," Tindwyl said. "You struck
down the Lord Ruler. You were trained by the Survivor, and you are
the king's consort."
"I'm not his
consort," Vin said, flushing. "We're just . . . "
Lord, even I don't understand our relationship. How am I supposed
to explain it?
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow.
"All right,"
Vin said, sighing and walking forward.
"I'll go with
you," Allrianne said, grabbing Vin's arm as if they had been
friends since childhood. Vin resisted, but couldn't figure a way to
pry her off without making a scene.
They stepped out of
the shop. The crowd was already large, and the periphery was filling
as more and more people came to investigate. Most were skaa in brown,
ash-stained work coats or simple gray dresses. The ones in the front
backed away as Vin stepped out, giving her a little ring of empty
space, and a murmur of awed excitement moved through the crowd.
"Wow,"
Allrianne said quietly. "There sure are a lot of them . . . ."
Vin nodded. OreSeur
sat where he had before, near the door, and he watched her with a
curious canine expression.
Allrianne smiled at
the crowd, waving with a sudden hesitance. "You can, you know,
fight them off or something if this turns messy, right?"
"That won't be
necessary," Vin said, finally slipping her arm free of
Allrianne's grasp and giving the crowd a bit of a Soothing to calm
them. After that, she stepped forward, trying to push down her sense
of itching nervousness. She'd grown to no longer feel she needed to
hide when she went out in public, but standing before a crowd like
this . . . well, she almost turned and slinked back into the
dressmaker's shop.
A voice, however,
stopped her. The speaker was a middle-aged man with an ash-stained
beard and a dirty black cap held nervously in his hands. He was a
strong man, probably a mill worker. His quiet voice seemed a contrast
to his powerful build. "Lady Heir. What will become of us?"
The terror—the
uncertainty—in the large man's voice was so piteous that Vin
hesitated. He regarded her with hopeful eyes, as did most of the
others.
So many, Vin
thought. I thought the Church of the Survivor was small. She
looked at the man, who stood wringing his cap. She opened her mouth,
but then . . . couldn't do it. She couldn't tell him that she didn't
know what would happen; she couldn't explain to those eyes that she
wasn't the savior that he needed.
"Everything
will be all right," Vin heard herself say, increasing her
Soothing, trying to take away some of their fear.
"But the
armies, Lady Heir!" one of the women said.
"They're
trying to intimidate us," Vin said. "But the king won't let
them. Our walls are strong, as are our soldiers. We can outlast this
siege."
The crowd was
silent.
"One of those
armies is led by Elend's father, Straff Venture," Vin said.
"Elend and I are going to go meet with Straff tomorrow. We will
persuade him to be our ally."
"The king is
going to surrender!" a voice said. "I heard it. He's going
to trade the city for his life."
"No," Vin
said. "He would never do that!!"
"He won't
fight for us!" a voice called. "He's not a soldier. He's a
politician!"
Other voices called
out in agreement. Reverence disappeared as people began to yell out
concerns, while others began to demand help. The dissidents continued
to rail against Elend, yelling that there was no way he could protect
them.
Vin raised her
hands to her ears. Trying to ward off the crowd, the chaos. "Stop!"
she yelled, Pushing out with steel and brass. Several people stumbled
back away from her, and she could see a wave in the crowd as buttons,
coins, and buckles suddenly pressed backward.
The people grew
suddenly quiet.
"I will suffer
no ill words spoken of our king!" Vin said, flaring her brass
and increasing her Soothing. "He is a good man, and a good
leader. He has sacrificed much for you—your freedom comes
because of his long hours spent drafting laws, and your livelihoods
come because of his work securing trade routes and agreements with
merchants."
Many members of the
crowd looked down. The bearded man at the front continued to twist
his cap, however, looking at Vin. "They're just right
frightened, Lady Heir. Right frightened."
"We'll protect
you," Vin said. What am I saying? "Elend and I,
we'll find a way. We stopped the Lord Ruler. We can stop these armies
. . . " She trailed off, feeling foolish.
Yet, the crowd
responded. Some were obviously still unsatisfied, but many seemed
calmed. The crowd began to break up, though some of its members came
forward, leading or carrying small children. Vin paused nervously.
Kelsier had often met with and held the children of the skaa, as if
giving them his blessing. She bid the group a hasty farewell and
ducked back into the shop, pulling Allrianne after her.
Tindwyl waited
inside, nodding with satisfaction.
"I lied,"
Vin said, pushing the door closed.
"No you
didn't," Tindwyl said. "You were optimistic. The truth or
fiction of what you said has yet to be proven."
"It won't
happen," Vin said. "Elend can't defeat three armies, not
even with my help."
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow. "Then you should leave. Run away, leave the people to
deal with the armies themselves."
"I didn't mean
that," Vin said.
"Well, make a
decision then," Tindwyl said. "Either give up on the city
or believe in it. Honestly, the pair of you . . . ." She shook
her head.
"I thought you
weren't going to be harsh with me," Vin noted.
"I have
trouble with that sometimes," Tindwyl said. "Come,
Allrianne. Let's finish your fitting."
They moved to do
so. However, at that moment—as if to belie Vin's assurances of
safety—several warning drums began to beat atop the city wall.
Vin froze, glancing
through the window, out over the anxious crowd.
One of the armies
was attacking. Cursing the delay, she rushed into the back of the
shop to change out of the bulky dress.
Elend scrambled up
the steps to the city wall, nearly tripping on his dueling cane in
his haste. He stumbled out of the stairwell, moving onto the wall
top, rearranging the cane at his side with a curse.
The wall top was in
chaos. Men scrambled about, calling to each other. Some had forgotten
their armor, others their bows. So many tried to get up after Elend
that the stairwell got clogged, and he watched hopelessly as men
crowded around the openings below, creating an even larger jam of
bodies in the courtyard.
Elend spun,
watching a large group of Straff's men—thousands of them—rush
toward the wall. Elend stood near Tin Gate, at the north of the city,
nearest Straff's army. He could see a separate group of soldiers
rushing toward Pewter Gate, a little to the east.
"Archers!"
Elend yelled. "Men, where are your bows?"
His voice, however,
was lost in the shouting. Captains moved about, trying to organize
the men, but apparently too many footmen had come to the wall,
leaving a lot of the archers trapped in the courtyard below.
Why? Elend
thought desperately, turning back toward the charging army. Why is
he attacking? We had an a agreement to meet!
Had he, perhaps,
gotten wind of Elend's plan to play both sides of the conflict?
Perhaps there really was a spy in the inner crew.
Either way, Elend
could only watch hopelessly as the army approached his wall. One
captain managed to get off a pathetic volley of arrows, but it didn't
do much good. As the army approached, arrows began to zip up toward
the wall, mixed with flying coins. Straff had Allomancers in the
group.
Elend cursed,
ducking down below a merlon as coins bounced against the stonework. A
few soldiers fell. Elend's soldiers. Killed because he'd been too
proud to surrender the city.
He peeked carefully
over the wall. A group of men carrying a battering ram were
approaching, their bodies carefully protected by men with shields.
The care probably meant that the rammers were Thugs, a suspicion
confirmed by the sound the ram made when it smashed into the gate.
That was not the blow of ordinary men.
Hooks followed
next. Shot up toward the wall by Coinshots below, falling far more
accurately than if they'd been thrown. Soldiers moved to pull them
off, but coins shot up, taking the men almost as quickly as they made
the attempt. The gate continued to thump beneath him, and he doubted
it would last for long.
And so we fall,
Elend thought. With barely a hint of resistance.
And there was
nothing he could do. He felt impotent, forced to keep ducking down
lest his white uniform make him a target. All of his politicking, all
of his preparations, all of his dreams and his plans. Gone.
And then Vin was
there. She landed atop the wall, breathing hard, amid a group of
wounded men. Coins and arrows that came near to her deflected back
out into the air. Men rallied around her, moving to remove hooks and
pull the wounded to safety. Her knives cut ropes, dropping them back
down below. She met Elend's eyes, looking determined, then moved as
if to leap over the side of the wall and confront the Thugs with
their battering ram.
Elend raised a
hand, but someone else spoke.
"Vin, wait!"
Clubs bellowed, bursting out of the stairwell.
She paused. Elend
had never heard such a forceful command from the gnarled general.
Arrows stopped
flying. The booming calmed. Elend stood hesitantly, watching with a
frown as the army retreated back across the ash-strewn fields toward
their camp. They left a couple of corpses behind; Elend's men had
actually managed to hit a few with their arrows. His own army had
taken far heavier casualties: some two dozen men appeared to be
wounded.
"What . . . ?"
Elend asked, turning to Clubs.
"They weren't
putting up scaling ladders," Clubs said, eyeing the retreating
force. "This wasn't an actual attack."
"What was it
then?" Vin asked, frowning.
"A test,"
Clubs said. "It's common in warfare—a quick skirmish to
see how your enemy responds, to feel out their tactics and
preparations."
Elend turned,
watching the disorganized soldiers make way for healers to care for
the wounded. "A test," he said, glancing at Clubs. "My
guess is that we didn't do very well."
Clubs shrugged.
"Far worse than we should have. Maybe this will scare the lads
into paying better attention during drills." He paused, and
Elend could see something he wasn't expressing. Worry.
Elend glanced out
over the wall, watching the retreating army. Suddenly, it made sense.
It was exactly the kind of move that his father liked to make.
The meeting with
Straff would take place as planned. However, before it happened,
Straff wanted Elend to know something.
I can take this
city any time, the attack seemed to say. It's mine, no matter
what you do. Remember that.
He was forced
into war by a misunderstanding—and always claimed he was no
warrior—yet he came to fight as well as any man.





26
"THIS IS NOT A
GOOD idea, Mistress." OreSeur sat on his haunches, watching Vin
unpack a large, flat box.
"Elend thinks
it's the only way," she said, pulling off the top of the box.
The luxurious blue dress lay wrapped within. She pulled it out,
noting its comparatively light weight. She walked over to the
changing screen and began to disrobe.
"And the
assault on the walls yesterday?" OreSeur asked.
"That was a
warning," she said, continuing to unbutton her shirt. "Not
a serious attack." Though, apparently, it had really unsettled
the Assembly. Perhaps that had been the point. Clubs could say all he
wished about strategy and testing the walls, but from Vin's
standpoint, the thing Straff had gained most was even more fear and
chaos inside Luthadel.
Only a few weeks of
being besieged, and the city was already strained near to breaking.
Food was terribly expensive, and Elend had been forced to open the
city stockpiles. The people were on edge. Some few thought the attack
had been a victory for Luthadel, taking it as a good sign that the
army had been "repelled." Most, however, were simply even
more scared than they had been before.
But, again, Vin was
left with a conundrum. How to react, facing such an overpowering
force? Cower, or try to continue with life? Straff had tested the
walls, true—but he had maintained the larger part of his army
back and in position, should Cett have tried to make an opportunistic
attack at that time. He'd wanted information, and he'd wanted to
intimidate the city.
"I still don't
know if this meeting is a good idea," OreSeur said. "The
attack aside, Straff is not a man to be trusted. Kelsier had me study
all of the major noblemen in the city when I was preparing to become
Lord Renoux. Straff is deceitful and harsh, even for a human."
Vin sighed,
removing her trousers, then pulled on the dress's slip. It wasn't as
tight as some, and gave her a lot of room to move through the thigh
and legs. Good so far.
OreSeur's objection
was logical. One of the first things she had learned on the street
was to avoid situations where it was difficult to flee. Her every
instinct rebelled at the idea of walking into Straff's camp.
Elend had made his
decision, however. And, Vin understood that she needed to support
him. In fact, she was even coming to agree with the move. Straff
wanted to intimidate the entire city—but he really wasn't as
threatening as he thought. Not as long as he had to worry about Cett.
Vin had had enough
of intimidation in her life. In a way, Straff's attack on the walls
left her feeling even more determined to manipulate him to their own
ends. Going into his camp seemed a bit crazy on first impression, but
the more she thought about it, the more she realized that it was the
only way they were going to get to Straff. He had to see them as
weak, had to feel that his bullying tactics had worked. That was the
only way they would win.
That meant doing
something she didn't like. It meant being surrounded, entering the
enemy's den. However, if Elend did manage to get out of the camp
safely, it would provide a large morale boost for the city. Beyond
that, it would make Ham and the rest of the crew more confident in
Elend. Nobody would even have questioned the idea of Kelsier entering
an enemy camp to negotiate; in fact, they probably would have
expected him to come back from the negotiations somehow having
convinced Straff to surrender.
I just need to
make sure he comes back out safely, Vin thought, pulling on the
dress. Straff can display all the muscle he wants—none of it
will matter if we're the ones directing his attacks.
She nodded to
herself, smoothing her dress. Then she walked out from behind the
changing screen, studying herself in her mirror. Though the
dressmaker had obviously sewn it to retain a traditional form, it
didn't have a completely triangular bell shape, but instead fell a
bit straighter down along her thighs. It was cut open near the
shoulders—though it had tight sleeves and open cuffs—and
the waist bent with her and gave her a good range of motion.
Vin stretched a
bit, jumping, twisting. She was surprised at how light the dress
felt, and how well she moved in it. Of course, any skirt would hardly
be ideal for fighting—but this one would be an enormous
improvement over the bulky creations she had worn to the parties a
year before.
"Well?"
she asked, spinning.
OreSeur raised a
canine eyebrow. "What?"
"What do you
think?"
OreSeur cocked his
head. "Why ask me?"
"Because I
care what you think," Vin said.
"The dress is
very nice, Mistress. Though, to be honest, I have always found the
garments to be a little ridiculous. All of that cloth and color, it
doesn't seem very practical."
"Yes, I know,"
Vin said, using a pair of sapphire barrettes to pin the sides of her
hair back a bit from her face. "But . . . well, I'd forgotten
how much fun these things could be to wear."
"I fail to see
why that would be, Mistress."
"That's
because you're a man."
"Actually, I'm
a kandra."
"But you're a
boy kandra."
"How do you
know that?" OreSeur asked. "Gender is not easy to tell in
my people, since our forms are fluid."
Vin looked at him,
raising an eyebrow. "I can tell." Then she turned back to
her jewelry cabinet. She didn't have much; though the crew had
outfitted her with a good sampling of jewelry during her days as
Valette, she had given most of it to Elend to help fund various
projects. She had, however, kept a few of her favorites—as if
she'd known that she'd someday find her way back into a dress.
I'm just wearing
it this once, she thought. This still isn't me.
She snapped on a
sapphire bracelet. Like her barrettes, it contained no metal; the
gemstones were set into a thick hardwood that closed with a wooden
twist-clasp. The only metal on her body, then, would be her coins,
her metal vial, and the single earring. Kept, by Kelsier's
suggestion, as a bit of metal she could Push on in an emergency.
"Mistress,"
OreSeur said, pulling something out from under her bed with his paw.
A sheet of paper. "This fell from the box as you were opening
it." He grabbed it between two of his surprisingly dexterous paw
fingers and held it up for her.
Vin accepted the
paper. Lady Heir, it read.
I
made the chest and bodice extra tight to give support—and cut
the skirts so they would resist flaring—in case you need to
jump. There are slits for metal vials in each of the cuffs, as well
as a ripple in the cloth cut to obscure a dagger strapped around each
forearm. I hope you find the alterations suitable.
Feldeu,
Dressmaker.
She glanced down,
noting the cuffs. They were thick and wide, and the way they pointed
at the sides made perfect hiding places. Though the sleeves were
tight around the upper arms, the forearms were looser, and she could
see where the daggers could be strapped.
"It seems that
he has made dresses for Mistborn before," OreSeur noted.
"Probably,"
Vin said. She moved over to her dressing mirror to apply a little
makeup, and found that several of her makeup pads had dried out.
Guess I haven't done this for a while either . . . .
"What time are
we leaving, Mistress?" OreSeur asked.
Vin paused.
"Actually, OreSeur, I wasn't planning to bring you. I still
intend to keep your cover with the other people in the palace, and I
think it would look very suspicious of me to bring my pet dog on this
particular trip."
OreSeur was silent
for a moment. "Oh," he said. "Of course. Good luck,
then, Mistress."
Vin felt only a
tiny stab of disappointment; she'd expected him to object more. She
pushed the emotion aside. Why should she fault him? He'd been the one
to rightly point out the dangers of going into the camp.
OreSeur simply lay
down, resting head on paws as he watched her continue applying her
makeup.
"But, El,"
Ham said, "you should at least let us send you in our own
carriage."
Elend shook his
head, straightening his jacket as he looked in the mirror. "That
would require sending in a coachman, Ham."
"Right,"
Ham said. "Who would be me."
"One man won't
make a difference in getting us out of that camp. And, the fewer
people I take with me, the fewer people Vin and I have to worry
about."
Ham shook his head.
"El, I . . . "
Elend laid a hand
on Ham's shoulder. "I appreciate the concern, Ham. But, I can do
this. If there's one man in this world I can manipulate, it's my
father. I'll come out of this with him feeling assured that he has
the city in his pocket."
Ham sighed. "All
right."
"Oh, one other
thing," Elend said hesitantly.
"Yes?"
"Would you
mind calling me 'Elend' instead of just 'El'?"
Ham chuckled. "I
suppose that one's easy enough to do."
Elend smiled
thankfully. It's not what Tindwyl wanted, but it's a start. We'll
worry about the "Your Majesty"s later.
The door opened,
and Dockson walked in. "Elend," he said. "This just
arrived for you." He held up a sheet of paper.
"From the
Assembly?" Elend asked.
Dockson nodded.
"They're not happy about you missing the meeting this evening."
"Well, I can't
change the appointment with Straff just because they want to meet a
day early," Elend said. "Tell them I'll try and visit when
I get back."
Dockson nodded,
then turned as a rustling sounded from behind him. He stepped to the
side, a strange look on his face, as Vin walked up to the doorway.
And she was wearing
a dress—a beautiful blue gown that was sleeker than the common
courtly fare. Her black hair sparkled with a pair of sapphire
barrettes, and she seemed . . . different. More feminine—or,
rather, more confident in her femininity.
How much she's
changed since I first met her, Elend thought, smiling. Almost two
years had passed. Then she had been a youth, albeit one with the life
experiences of someone far older. Now she was a woman—a very
dangerous woman, but one who still looked up at him with eyes that
were just a bit uncertain, just a bit insecure.
"Beautiful,"
Elend whispered. She smiled.
"Vin!"
Ham said, turning. "You're wearing a dress!"
Vin flushed. "What
did you expect, Ham? That I would meet with the king of the Northern
Dominance in trousers?"
"Well . . . "
Ham said. "Actually, yes."
Elend chuckled.
"Just because you insist on going about everywhere in
casual clothing, Ham, doesn't mean that everyone does. Honestly,
don't you get tired of those vests?"
Ham shrugged.
"They're easy. And simple."
"And cold,"
Vin said, rubbing her arms. "I'm glad I asked for something with
sleeves."
"Be thankful
for the weather," Ham said. "Every chill you suffer will
seem far worse to the men out in those armies."
Elend nodded.
Winter had, technically, started. The weather probably wouldn't get
bad enough to be more than a mild discomfort—they rarely got
snow in the Central Dominance—but the chill nights certainly
wouldn't improve morale.
"Well, let's
go," Vin said. "The sooner we get this over with, the
better."
Elend stepped
forward, smiling, taking Vin's hands. "I appreciate this, Vin,"
he said quietly. "And you really do look gorgeous. If we weren't
marching off to near certain doom, I'd be tempted to command a ball
be held tonight just for the opportunity to show you off."
Vin smiled. "Near
certain doom is that compelling?"
"Guess I've
been spending too much time with the crew." He leaned down to
kiss her, but she yelped and jumped back.
"It took me
the better part of an hour to get this makeup on right," she
snapped. "No kissing!"
Elend chuckled as
Captain Demoux poked his head in the door. "Your Majesty, the
carriage has arrived."
Elend looked at
Vin. She nodded.
"Let's go,"
he said.
Sitting inside the
carriage Straff had sent for them, Elend could see a solemn group
standing on the wall, watching them roll away. The sun was near to
setting.
He commands us
to come in the evening; we'll have to leave when the mists are out,
Elend thought. A crafty way of pointing out how much power he has
over us.
It was his father's
way—a move, in a way, that was similar to the attack on the
walls a day before. To Straff, everything was about posturing. Elend
had watched his father at court, and had seen him manipulate even
obligators. By holding the contract to oversee the Lord Ruler's atium
mine, Straff Venture had played a game even more dangerous than his
fellow noblemen. And he had played that game very well. He hadn't
factored in Kelsier throwing chaos into the mix, but who had?
Since the Collapse,
Straff had secured the most stable, and most powerful, kingdom in the
Final Empire. He was a crafty, careful man who knew how to plan for
years to get what he wanted. And this was the man Elend had to
manipulate.
"You look
worried," Vin said. She was across from him in the carriage,
sitting in a prim, ladylike posture. It was as if donning a dress
somehow granted her new habits and mannerisms. Or just a return to
old ones—she'd once been able to act like a noblewoman well
enough to fool Elend.
"We'll be all
right," she said. "Straff won't hurt you—even if
things go bad, he won't dare make a martyr of you."
"Oh, I'm not
worried about my safety," Elend said.
Vin raised an
eyebrow. "Because?"
"Because I
have you," Elend said with a smile. "You're worth an army,
Vin."
This, however,
didn't seem to console her.
"Come here,"
he said, scooting over and waving her to the seat beside him.
She rose and moved
across the carriage—but paused, eyeing him. "Makeup."
"I'll be
careful," Elend promised.
She nodded, sitting
and letting him put an arm around her. "Be careful of the hair,
too," she said. "And your suit coat—don't get
anything on it."
"When did you
get so fashion-conscious?" he asked.
"It's the
dress," Vin said with a sigh. "As soon as I put it on, all
of Sazed's lessons started coming back to me."
"I really do
like the dress on you," Elend said.
Vin shook her head.
"What?"
Elend asked as the carriage bumped, pushing her a bit closer to him.
Another new perfume, he thought. At least that's one habit
she never got out of.
"This isn't
me, Elend," she said quietly. "This dress, these
mannerisms. They're a lie."
Elend sat quietly
for a moment.
"No
objections?" Vin said. "Everyone else thinks I'm speaking
nonsense."
"I don't
know," Elend said honestly. "Changing into my new clothes
made me feel different, so what you say makes sense. If
wearing dresses feels wrong to you, then you don't have to wear them.
I want you to be happy, Vin."
Vin smiled, looking
up at him. Then she leaned up and kissed him.
"I thought you
said none of that," he said.
"From you,"
she said. "I'm Mistborn—we're more precise."
Elend smiled,
though he couldn't quite feel jovial. Conversation, however, did keep
him from fretting. "I feel uncomfortable in these clothes,
sometimes. Everyone expects so much more from me when I wear them.
They expect a king."
"When I wear a
dress," Vin said, "they expect a lady. Then they're
disappointed when they find me instead."
"Anyone who
would feel disappointed to find you is too dense to be of any
relevance," Elend said. "I don't want you to be like them,
Vin. They're not honest. They don't care. I like you as you are."
"Tindwyl
thinks that I can be both," Vin said. "A woman and a
Mistborn."
"Tindwyl is
wise," Elend said. "A bit brutal, but wise. You should
listen to her."
"You just told
me you liked me how I am."
"I do,"
Elend said. "But I'd like you however you were, Vin. I
love you. The question is, how do you like yourself?"
That gave her
pause.
"Clothing
doesn't really change a man," Elend said. "But it changes
how others react to him. Tindwyl's words. I think . . . I think the
trick is convincing yourself that you deserve the reactions
you get. You can wear the court's dresses, Vin, but make them your
own. Don't worry that you aren't giving people what they want. Give
them who you are, and let that be enough." He paused, smiling.
"It was for me."
She smiled back,
then carefully leaned against him. "All right," she said.
"Enough insecurity for the moment. Let's review. Tell me more
about your father's disposition."
"He's a
perfect imperial nobleman. Ruthless, clever, and infatuated with
power. You remember my . . . experience when I was thirteen?"
Vin nodded.
"Well, Father
was very fond of skaa brothels. I think that he liked how strong he
felt by taking a girl while knowing that she would be killed for his
passion. He keeps several dozen mistresses, and if they don't please
him, they get removed."
Vin muttered
something quietly in response to this.
"He's the same
way with political allies. One didn't ally with House Venture—one
agreed to be dominated by House Venture. If you weren't willing to be
our slave, then you didn't get to contract with us."
Vin nodded. "I've
known crewleaders like that."
"And how did
you survive when they turned an eye toward you?"
"By acting
unimportant," Vin said. "By crawling on the ground when
they passed and by never giving them reason to challenge me. Exactly
what you're planning to do tonight."
Elend nodded.
"Be careful,"
Vin said. "Don't let Straff think that you're mocking him."
"All right."
"And don't
promise too much," Vin said. "Act like you're trying to
seem tough. Let him think he's bullying you into doing what he
wants—he'll enjoy that."
"You've had
experience with this before, I see."
"Too much of
it," Vin said. "But, you've heard this before."
Elend nodded.
They'd planned and replanned this meeting. Now he simply had to do
what the crew had taught him. Make Straff think we're weak, imply
we'll give him the city—but only if he helps us against Cett
first.
Outside the window,
Elend could see that they were approaching Straff's army. So big!
he thought. Where did Father learn to administrate a force like
this?
Elend had hoped,
perhaps, that his father's lack of military experience would
translate to a poorly run army. Yet, the tents were arranged in a
careful pattern, and the soldiers wore neat uniforms. Vin moved over
to her window, looking out with avid eyes, showing far more interest
than an imperial noblewoman would have dared. "Look," she
said, pointing.
"What?"
Elend asked, leaning over.
"Obligator,"
Vin said.
Elend looked over
her shoulder, spotting the former imperial priest—the skin
around his eyes tattooed in a wide pattern—directing a line of
soldiers outside a tent. "So that's it. He's using obligators to
administrate."
Vin shrugged. "It
makes sense. They'd know how to manage large groups of people."
"And how to
supply them," Elend said. "Yes, it's a good idea—but
it's still surprising. It implies that he still needs obligators—and
that he's still subject to the Lord Ruler's authority. Most of the
other kings threw off the obligators as soon as they could."
Vin frowned. "I
thought you said your father likes being in power."
"He does,"
Elend said. "But also likes powerful tools. He always keeps a
kandra, and he has a history of associating with dangerous
Allomancers. He believes that he can control them—and he
probably believes the same thing about the obligators."
The carriage
slowed, then stopped beside a large tent. Straff Venture emerged a
moment later.
Elend's father had
always been a large man, firm of figure with a commanding posture.
The new beard only heightened the effect. He wore a sharp, well-cut
suit, just like the suits he had tried to get Elend to wear as a boy.
That was when Elend had begun wearing his clothing disheveled—the
buttons undone, the jackets too large. Anything to separate him from
his father.
Elend's defiance
had never been meaningful, however. He had annoyed Straff, pulling
small stunts and acting foolish when he knew he could get away with
it. None of it had mattered.
Not until that
final night. Luthadel in flames, the skaa rebellion running out of
control, threatening to bring down the entire city. A night of chaos
and destruction, with Vin trapped somewhere within it.
Then Elend had
stood up to Straff Venture.
I'm not the same
boy you pushed around, Father. Vin squeezed his arm, and Elend
climbed out of the carriage as the coachman opened the door. Straff
waited quietly, a strange look on his face as Elend raised a hand to
help Vin down.
"You came,"
Straff said.
"You seem
surprised, Father."
Straff shook his
head. "I see that you're just as big an idiot as ever, boy.
You're in my power now—I could have you killed with a bare wave
of my hand." He raised his arm, as if to do just that.
Now's the
moment, Elend thought, heart thumping. "I've always
been in your power, Father," he said. "You could have had
me killed months ago, could have taken my city away at a bare whim. I
don't see how my coming here changes anything."
Straff hesitated.
"We came for
dinner," Elend said. "I had hoped to give you a chance to
meet Vin, and had hoped that we might discuss certain . . . issues of
particular import to you."
Straff frowned.
That's right,
Elend thought. Wonder if I have some offer yet to make. You know
that the first man to play his hand usually loses.
Straff wouldn't
pass up an opportunity for gain—even a slim opportunity, like
the one Elend represented. He probably figured there was nothing
Elend could say that was of real importance. But could he be sure?
What did he have to lose?
"Go and
confirm with my chef that there will be three for dinner,"
Straff said to a servant.
Elend let out a
lightly held breath.
"That girl's
your Mistborn, then?" Straff asked.
Elend nodded.
"Cute little
thing," Straff said. "Tell her to stop Soothing my
emotions."
Vin flushed.
Straff nodded
toward the tent. Elend led Vin forward, though she glanced over her
shoulder, obviously not liking the idea of exposing her back to
Straff.
Little bit late
for that . . . Elend thought.
The tent chamber
was what Elend would have expected of his father: stuffed with
pillows and rich furniture, very little of which Straff would
actually use. Straff furnished to suggest his power. Like the massive
keeps of Luthadel, a nobleman's surroundings were an expression of
how important he was.
Vin waited quietly,
tensely, at Elend's side in the center of the room. "He's good,"
she whispered. "I was as subtle as I can manage, and he still
noticed my touch."
Elend nodded. "He's
also a Tineye," he said in a normal voice. "So he's
probably listening to us right now."
Elend looked toward
the door. Straff walked in a few moments later, giving no indication
as to whether he had heard Vin or not. A group of servants entered a
few moments later, carrying a large dining table.
Vin inhaled
sharply. The servants were skaa—imperial skaa, after the old
tradition. They were ragged, their clothing made of torn smocks, and
showed bruises from a recent beating. They carried their loads with
lowered eyes.
"Why the
reaction, girl?" Straff asked. "Oh, that's right. You're
skaa, aren't you—pretty dress notwithstanding? Elend is very
kind; I wouldn't let you wear something like that." Or much
at all, his tone implied.
Vin shot Straff a
look, but pulled a little closer to Elend, grabbing his arm. Again,
Straff's words were only about posturing; Straff was cruel, but only
insofar as it served him. He wanted to make Vin uncomfortable.
Which he seemed to
be doing. Elend frowned, glancing down, and caught just a hint of a
sly smile on her lips.
Breeze has told
me that Vin is more subtle with her Allomancy than most Soothers,
he recalled. Father's good, but for him to pick out her touch
. . .
She let him, of
course.
Elend looked back
at Straff, who hit one of the skaa servants on their way out. "I
hope none of them are relatives of yours," Straff said to Vin.
"They haven't been very diligent lately. I might have to execute
a few."
"I'm not skaa
anymore," Vin said quietly. "I'm a noblewoman."
Straff just
laughed. He had already dismissed Vin as a threat. He knew she was
Mistborn, he must have heard that she was dangerous, and yet he now
assumed that she was weak and inconsequential.
She is good at
this, Elend thought with wonder. Servants began to bring in a
feast that was impressive considering the circumstances. As they
waited, Straff turned to an aide. "Send in Hoselle," he
ordered. "And tell her to be quick."
He seems less
reserved than I remember, Elend thought. In the Lord Emperor's
day, a good nobleman had been stiff and inhibited when in public,
though many had turned to extravagant indulgence when in private.
They would dance and have quiet dinner conversation at the ball, for
instance, but enjoy whores and drunkenness in the small hours of
night.
"Why the
beard, Father?" Elend asked. "Last I knew, those weren't in
fashion."
"I set the
fashion now, boy," Straff said. "Sit." Vin waited
respectfully, Elend noticed, until Elend was seated before taking her
place. She managed to maintain an air of half jumpiness: she'd look
Straff in the eyes, but always gave a reflexive twitch, as if part of
her wanted to glance away.
"Now,"
Straff said, "tell me why you're here."
"I thought it
was obvious, Father," Elend said. "I'm here to discuss our
alliance."
Straff raised an
eyebrow. "Alliance? We both just agreed that your life is mine.
I don't see a need to ally with you."
"Perhaps,"
Elend said. "But, there are other factors at play here. I assume
that you weren't expecting Cett's arrival?"
"Cett is of
little concern," Straff said, turning his attention to the meal:
big slabs of barely cooked beef. Vin wrinkled her nose, though Elend
couldn't tell if that was part of her act or not.
Elend cut his
steak. "A man with an army nearly as large as your own is hardly
of 'little' concern, Father."
Straff shrugged.
"He'll be of no trouble to me once I have the city walls. You'll
turn those over to me as part of our alliance, I assume?"
"And invite
Cett to attack the city?" Elend said. "Yes, together you
and I could hold against him, but why go on the defensive? Why let
him weaken our fortifications, and possibly just continue this siege
until both of our armies are starving? We need to attack him,
Father."
Straff snorted.
"You think I need your help to do so?"
"You do if you
want to beat him with any measure of assured success," Elend
said. "We can take him easily together—but never alone. We
need each other. Let's attack, you leading your armies, me leading
mine."
"Why are you
so eager?" Straff asked, narrowing his eyes.
"Because I
want to prove something," Elend said. "Look, we both know
you're going to take Luthadel from me. But, if we ride together
against Cett first, it will look like I wanted to ally with
you all along. I'll be able to give you the city without looking like
a complete buffoon. I can spin it that I brought in my father to help
us against the army I knew was coming. I turn the city over to you,
and then become your heir again. We both get what we want. But only
once Cett is dead."
Straff paused, and
Elend could see that his words were having an effect. Yes, he
thought. Think that I'm just the same boy you left
behind—eccentric, eager to resist you for silly reasons. And,
saving face is a very Venture thing to do.
"No,"
Straff said.
Elend started.
"No,"
Straff said again, turning to his meal. "That's not how we're
going to do this, boy. I'll decide when—or even if—I
attack Cett."
That should have
worked! Elend thought. He studied Straff, trying to judge what
was wrong. There was a faint hesitance about his father.
I need more
information, he thought. He glanced to his side, to where Vin
sat, spinning something lightly in her hand. Her fork. She met his
eyes, then tapped it lightly.
Metal, Elend
thought. Good idea. He looked over at Straff. "You came
for the atium," he said. "You don't have to conquer my city
to get it."
Straff leaned
forward. "Why haven't you spent it?"
"Nothing
brings sharks faster than fresh blood, Father," Elend said.
"Spending large amounts of atium would only have indicated for
certain that I had it—a bad idea, considering the trouble we
took to squelch those rumors."
There was a sudden
motion at the front of the tent, and soon a flustered young girl
entered. She wore a ball gown—red—and had her black hair
pulled back into a long, flowing tail. She was, perhaps, fifteen.
"Hoselle,"
Straff said, pointing to the chair next to him.
The girl nodded
obediently, scurrying forward to sit beside Straff. She was done up
in makeup, and the dress was low-cut. Elend had little doubt as to
her relationship with Straff.
Straff smiled and
chewed his food, calm and gentlemanly. The girl looked a little bit
like Vin—same almond face, similar dark hair, same fine
features and thin build. It was a statement. I can get one just
like yours—only younger and prettier. More posturing.
It was that
moment—that smirk in Straff's eyes—which reminded Elend
more than ever why he hated his father.
"Perhaps we
can make a deal, boy," Straff said. "Deliver the
atium to me, and I'll deal with Cett."
"Getting it to
you will take time," Elend said.
"Why?"
Straff asked. "Atium is light."
"There's a lot
of it."
"Not so much
you couldn't pack it on a cart and send it out," Straff said.
"It's more
complicated than that," Elend said.
"I don't think
it is," Straff said, smiling. "You just don't want to give
it to me."
Elend frowned.
"We don't have
it," Vin whispered.
Straff turned.
"We never
found it," she said. "Kelsier overthrew the Lord Ruler just
so he could get that atium. But we never could find out where the
metal was. It probably wasn't ever in the city."
Wasn't expecting
that . . . Elend thought. Of course, Vin tended to do things by
instinct, much as Kelsier was said to have done. All the planning in
the world could go out the window with Vin around—but what she
did instead was usually better.
Straff sat for a
moment. He seemed to believe Vin. "So you really have nothing at
all to offer me."
I need to act
weak, Elend remembered. Need him to think he can take the city
any time, but also think it isn't worth taking right now. He
began to tap the table quietly with his index finger, trying to look
nervous. If Straff thinks we don't have the atium . . . then he'll
be a lot less likely to risk attacking the city. Less gain. That's
why Vin said what she did.
"Vin doesn't
know what she's talking about," Elend said. "I've kept the
atium hidden, even from her. I'm sure we can arrange something,
Father."
"No,"
Straff said, now sounding amused. "You really don't have
it. Zane said . . . but, well, I didn't believe . . . "
Straff shook his
head, turning back toward his meal. The girl at his side didn't eat;
she sat quietly, like the ornament she was expected to be. Straff
took a long drink of his wine, then let out a satisfied sigh. He
looked at his child mistress. "Leave us," he said.
She immediately did
as commanded.
"You, too,"
Straff said to Vin.
Vin stiffened
slightly. She looked toward Elend.
"It's all
right," he said slowly.
She paused, then
nodded. Straff himself was little danger to Elend, and she was a
Mistborn. If something went wrong, she could get to Elend quickly.
And, if she left, it would do what they wanted—make Elend look
less powerful. In a better position to deal with Straff.
Hopefully.
"I'll wait
just outside," Vin said quietly, withdrawing.
He was no simple
soldier. He was a force of leadership—a man that fate itself
seemed to support.





27
"ALL RIGHT,"
STRAFF SAID, setting down his fork. "Let's be honest, boy. I'm
this close to simply having you killed."
"You'd execute
your only son?" Elend asked.
Straff shrugged.
"You need me,"
Elend said. "To help you fight Cett. You can kill me, but you'd
gain nothing. You'd still have to take Luthadel by force, and Cett
would still be able to attack—and defeat you—in your
weakened state."
Straff smiled,
folding his arms, leaning forward so he loomed over the table. "You
are wrong on both counts, boy. First, I think that if I killed you,
the next leader of Luthadel would be more accommodating. I have
certain interests in the city who indicate that is true. Second, I
don't need your help to fight Cett. He and I already have a treaty."
Elend paused.
"What?"
"What do you
think I've been doing these last few weeks? Sitting and waiting on
your whims? Cett and I have exchanged pleasantries. He's not
interested in the city—he just wants the atium. We agreed to
split what we discover in Luthadel, then work together to take the
rest of the Final Empire. He conquers to the west and north, I head
east and south. Very accommodating man, Cett."
He's bluffing,
Elend thought with reasonable certainty. That wasn't Straff's way; he
wouldn't make an alliance with someone so near to him in strength.
Straff feared betrayal too much.
"You think I
would believe that?" Elend said.
"Believe what
you wish," Straff said.
"And the
koloss army marching this way?" Elend asked, playing one of
their trump cards.
This made Straff
pause.
"If you want
to take Luthadel before those koloss get here, Father," Elend
said, "then I think you might want to be a little more
accommodating toward the man who's come, offering you everything you
want. I only ask one thing—let me have a victory. Let me fight
Cett, secure my legacy. Then you can have the city."
Straff thought
about it, thought about it long enough that Elend dared to hope he
might just have won. Then, however, Straff shook his head. "No,
I think not. I'll take my chances with Cett. I don't know why he is
willing to let me have Luthadel, but he doesn't seem to care much
about it."
"And you do?"
Elend said. "You know we don't have the atium. What does the
city matter to you now?"
Straff leaned
forward a bit farther. Elend could smell his breath, odorous from the
dinner spices. "That's where you are wrong about me, boy. That's
why—even if you'd been able to promise me that atium—you
would never have left this camp tonight. I made a mistake a year ago.
If I'd stayed in Luthadel, I would have been the one on that throne.
Instead, it was you. I can't imagine why—I guess a weak Venture
was still better than the other alternatives."
Straff was
everything Elend had hated about the old empire. Presumptuous. Cruel.
Arrogant.
Weakness,
Elend thought, calming himself. I can't be threatening. He
shrugged. "It's only a city, Father. From my position, it
doesn't matter half as much as your army."
"It's more
than a city," Straff said. "It's the Lord Ruler's city—and
it has my home in it. My keep. I understand that you're using it as
your palace."
"I didn't
really have any other place to go."
Straff turned back
to his meal. "All right," he said in between cutting chunks
of steak, "at first, I thought you were an idiot for coming
tonight, but now I'm not so certain. You must have seen the
inevitable."
"You're
stronger," Elend said. "I can't stand up to you."
Straff nodded.
"You've impressed me, boy. Wearing proper clothing, getting
yourself a Mistborn mistress, maintaining control of the city. I'm
going to let you live."
"Thank you,"
Elend said.
"And, in
exchange, you're going to give me Luthadel."
"As soon as
Cett is dealt with."
Straff laughed.
"No, that's not the way these things work, boy. We're not
negotiating. You're listening to my orders. Tomorrow, we'll ride to
the city together, and you'll order the gates opened. I'll march my
army in and take command, and Luthadel will become the new capital of
my kingdom. If you stay in line and do as I say, I'll name you heir
again."
"We can't do
that," Elend said. "I left orders that the gates weren't to
be opened to you, no matter what."
Straff paused.
"My advisors
thought you might try and use Vin as a hostage, forcing me to
relinquish the city," Elend said. "If we go together,
they'll assume you're threatening me."
Straff's mood
darkened. "You'd better hope that they don't."
"They will,"
Elend said. "I know these men, Father. They'd be eager for an
excuse to take the city away from me."
"Then, why
come here?"
"To do as I
said," Elend said. "To negotiate an alliance against Cett.
I can deliver Luthadel to you—but I still need time. Let's take
down Cett first."
Straff grabbed his
dinner knife by the hilt and slammed it down into the table. "I
said this wasn't a negotiation! You don't make demands, boy. I could
have you killed!"
"I'm just
stating facts, Father," Elend said quickly. "I don't want
to—"
"You've gotten
smooth," Straff said, eyes narrowing. "What did you hope to
accomplish with this game? Coming to my camp? Bringing nothing to
offer . . . " He paused, then continued. "Nothing to offer
except for that girl. Pretty little thing, she is."
Elend flushed.
"That won't get you into the city. Remember, my advisors thought
you might try threatening her."
"Fine,"
Straff snapped. "You die; I take the city by force."
"And Cett
attacks you from behind," Elend said. "Pinning you against
our wall and forcing you to fight surrounded."
"He'd take
heavy losses," Straff said. "He wouldn't be able to take
and hold the city after that."
"Even with
diminished forces, he'd have a better chance of taking it from us
than he would if he waited and then tried to take it from you."
Straff stood. "I'll
have to take that chance. I left you behind before. I'm not going to
let you loose again, boy. Those cursed skaa were supposed to kill you
and leave me free of you."
Elend stood as
well. However, he could see the resolve in Straff's eyes.
It isn't
working, Elend thought, panic beginning to set in. This plan had
been a gamble, but he hadn't ever really thought that he'd fail.
Indeed, he'd played his cards well. But, something was
wrong—something he hadn't anticipated, and still didn't
understand. Why was Straff resisting so much?
I'm too new to
this, Elend thought. Ironically, if he had let his father train
him better as a child, he might have known what he'd done wrong. As
it was, he suddenly realized the gravity of his situation. Surrounded
by a hostile army. Separated from Vin.
He was going to
die.
"Wait!"
Elend said desperately.
"Ah,"
Straff said smiling. "Finally realized what you've gotten
yourself into?" There was pleasure in Straff's smile. Eagerness.
There had always been something inside Straff that had enjoyed
hurting others, though Elend had rarely seen it applied to him.
Propriety had always been there to stop Straff.
Propriety enforced
by the Lord Ruler. At that moment, Elend saw murder in his father's
eyes.
"You never
intended to let me live," Elend said. "Even if I'd given
you the atium, even if I'd gone with you to the city."
"You were dead
the moment I decided to march here," Straff said. "Idiot
boy. I do thank you for bringing me that girl, though. I'll take her
tonight. We'll see if she cries my name or yours while I'm—"
Elend laughed.
It was a desperate
laugh, a laugh at the ridiculous situation he'd gotten himself into,
a laugh at his sudden worry and fear—but most of all, it was a
laugh at the idea of Straff trying to force himself upon Vin. "You
have no idea how foolish you sound," Elend said.
Straff flushed.
"For that, boy, I'll be extra rough with her."
"You are a
pig, Father," Elend said. "A sick, disgusting man. You
thought you were a brilliant leader, but you were barely competent.
You nearly got our house destroyed—only the Lord Ruler's own
death saved you!"
Straff called for
his guards.
"You may take
Luthadel," Elend said, "but you'll lose it! I may have been
a bad king, but you'll be a terrible one. The Lord Ruler was a
tyrant, but he was also a genius. You're neither. You're just a
selfish man who'll use up his resources, then end up dead from a
knife in the back."
Straff pointed at
Elend as soldiers rushed in. Elend didn't cringe. He'd grown up with
this man, been raised by him, been tortured by him. And, despite it
all, Elend had never spoken his mind. He'd rebelled with the petty
timidity of a teenage boy, but he'd never spoken the truth.
It felt good. It
felt right.
Perhaps playing
the weak hand was a mistake against Straff. He always was fond of
crushing things.
And suddenly Elend
knew what he had to do. He smiled, looking Straff in the eyes.
"Kill me,
Father," he said, "and you'll die, too."
"Kill me,
Father," Elend said, "and you'll die, too."
Vin paused. She
stood outside the tent, in the darkness of early night. She'd been
standing with Straff's soldiers, but they'd rushed in at his command.
She'd moved into the darkness, and now stood on the north side of the
tent, watching the shadowed forms move within.
She'd been about to
burst in. Elend hadn't been doing very well—not that he was a
bad negotiator. He was just too honest by nature. It wasn't difficult
to tell when he was bluffing, especially if you knew him well.
But, this new
proclamation was different. It wasn't a sign of Elend attempting to
be clever, nor was it an angry outburst like the one he'd made
moments before. Suddenly, he seemed calm and forceful.
Vin waited quietly,
her daggers out, tense in the mists before the glowing tent.
Something told her she had to give Elend just a few more moments.
Straff laughed at
Elend's threat.
"You are a
fool, Father," Elend said. "You think I came here to
negotiate? You think I would willingly deal with one such as you? No.
You know me better than that. You know that I'd never submit to you."
"Then why?"
Straff asked.
She could almost
hear Elend's smile. "I came to get near you, Father . . . and to
bring my Mistborn to the very heart of your camp."
Silence.
Finally, Straff
laughed. "You threaten me with that wisp of a girl? If that's
the great Mistborn of Luthadel I've been hearing of, then I'm sorely
disappointed."
"That's
because she wants you to feel that way," Elend said. "Think,
Father. You were suspicious, and the girl confirmed those suspicions.
But, if she's as good as the rumors say—and I know you've heard
the rumors—then how would you have spotted her touch on your
emotions?
"You caught
her Soothing you, and you called her on it. Then, you didn't feel the
touch anymore, so you assumed that she was cowed. But, after that,
you began to feel confident. Comfortable. You dismissed Vin as a
threat—but would any rational man dismiss a Mistborn, no matter
how small or quiet? In fact, you'd think that the small, quiet ones
would be the assassins you'd want to pay the most attention
to."
Vin smiled. Clever,
she thought. She reached out, Rioting Straff's emotions, flaring her
metal and stoking his sense of anger. He gasped in sudden shock. Take
the clue, Elend.
"Fear,"
Elend said.
She Soothed away
Straff's anger and exchanged it for fear.
"Passion."
She complied.
"Calmness."
She soothed
everything away. Inside the tent, she saw Straff's shadow standing
stiffly. An Allomancer couldn't force a person to do anything—and
usually, strong Pushes or Pulls on an emotion were less effective,
since they alerted the target that something was wrong. In this case,
however, Vin wanted Straff to know for certain she was watching.
She smiled,
extinguishing her tin. Then she burned duralumin and Soothed Straff's
emotions with explosive pressure, wiping away all capacity for
feeling within him. His shadow stumbled beneath the attack.
Her brass was gone
a moment later, and she turned on her tin again, watching the black
patterns on the canvas.
"She's
powerful, Father," Elend said. "She's more powerful than
any Allomancer you've known. She killed the Lord Ruler. She was
trained by the Survivor of Hathsin. And if you kill me, she'll
kill you."
Straff righted
himself, and the tent fell silent again.
A footstep sounded.
Vin spun, ducking, raising her dagger.
A familiar figure
stood in the night mists. "Why is it I can never sneak up on
you?" Zane asked quietly.
Vin shrugged and
turned back to the tent—but moved herself so she could keep an
eye on Zane, too. He walked over and crouched beside her, watching
the shadows.
"That's hardly
a useful threat," Straff finally said from within. "You'll
be dead, even if your Mistborn does get to me."
"Ah, Father,"
Elend said. "I was wrong about your interest in Luthadel.
However, you're also wrong about me—you've always been
wrong about me. I don't care if I die, not if it brings safety to my
people."
"Cett will
take the city if I'm gone," Straff said.
"I think my
people might be able to hold against him," Elend said. "After
all, he has the smaller army."
"This is
idiocy!" Straff snapped. He didn't, however, order his soldiers
forward any farther.
"Kill me, and
you die, too," Elend said. "And not just you. Your
generals. Your captains. Even your obligators. She has orders to
slaughter you all."
Zane took a step
closer to Vin, his feet crunching slightly on the packed-down weeds
that made up the floor of the camp. "Ah," he whispered,
"clever. No matter how strong your opponent is, he can't attack
if you've got a knife at his throat."
Zane leaned even
closer, and Vin looked up at him, their faces just inches from each
other. He shook his head in the soft mists. "But tell me—why
is it that people like you and me always have to be the knives?"
Inside the tent,
Straff was growing concerned. "No one is that powerful, boy,"
he said, "not even a Mistborn. She might be able to kill some of
my generals, but she'd never get to me. I have my own Mistborn."
"Oh?"
Elend said. "And why hasn't he killed her? Because he's afraid
to attack? If you kill me, Father—if you even make so much as a
move toward my city—then she'll begin the slaughter. Men
will die like prisoners before the fountains on a day of execution."
"I thought you
said he was above this kind of thing," Zane whispered. "You
claimed you weren't his tool. You said he wouldn't use you as an
assassin . . . ."
Vin shuffled
uncomfortably. "He's bluffing, Zane," she said. "He'd
never actually do anything like that."
"She is an
Allomancer like you've never seen, Father," Elend said, voice
muffled by the tent. "I've seen her fight other Allomancers—none
of them can even touch her."
"Is that
true?" Zane asked.
Vin paused. Elend
hadn't actually ever seen her attack other Allomancers. "He saw
me attack some soldiers once, and I've told him about my fights with
other Allomancers."
"Ah,"
Zane said softly. "So it's only a small lie, then. Those are
fine when one is king. Many things are. Exploiting one person to save
an entire kingdom? What leader wouldn't pay such a cheap price? Your
freedom in exchange for his victory."
"He's not
using me," Vin said.
Zane stood. Vin
turned slightly, watching carefully as he walked into the mists, away
from tents, torches, and soldiers. He paused, standing a short
distance away, looking up. Even with the light of tent and fires,
this camp was claimed by the mists. It spun all around them. From
within it, the torchlight and campfires seemed insignificant. Like
dying coals.
"What is this
to him," Zane said quietly, sweeping a hand around him.
"Can he ever understand the mists? Can he ever understand you?"
"He loves me,"
Vin said, glancing back at the shadowed forms. They had fallen quiet
for a moment, Straff obviously considering Elend's threats.
"He loves
you?" Zane asked. "Or he loves having you?"
"Elend isn't
like that," Vin said. "He's a good man."
"Good or not,
you aren't like him," Zane said, voice echoing in the night to
her tin-enhanced ears. "Can he understand what it is like to be
one of us? Can he know the things we know, care about the things we
love? Has he ever seen those?" Zane gestured upward, toward the
sky. Far beyond the mists, lights shone in the sky, like tiny
freckles. Stars, invisible to the normal eye. Only a person burning
tin could penetrate the mists and see them shining.
She remembered the
first time Kelsier had shown them to her. She remembered how stunned
she had been that the stars had been there all along, invisible
beyond the mists . . . .
Zane continued to
point upward. "Lord Ruler!" Vin whispered, taking a small
step away from the tent. Through the swirling mists, in the reflected
light of the tent, she could see something on Zane's arm.
The skin was
covered with thin white streaks. Scars.
Zane immediately
lowered his arm, hiding the scarred flesh with his sleeve.
"You were in
the Pits of Hathsin," Vin said quietly. "Like Kelsier."
Zane looked away.
"I'm sorry,"
Vin said.
Zane turned back,
smiling in the night. It was a firm, confident smile. He stepped
forward. "I understand you, Vin."
Then he bowed
slightly to her and jumped away, disappearing into the mists. Inside
the room, Straff spoke to Elend.
"Go. Leave
here."
The carriage rolled
away. Straff stood outside his tent, heedless of the mists, still
feeling a bit stunned.
I let him go.
Why did I let him go?
Yet—even
now—he could feel her touch slamming against him. One emotion
after another, like a treasonous maelstrom within him, and then . . .
nothing. Like a massive hand, grabbing his soul and squeezing it into
painful submission. It had felt the way he thought death might.
No Allomancer could
be that powerful.
Zane respects
her, Straff thought. And everyone says she killed the Lord
Ruler. That little thing. It couldn't be.
It seemed
impossible. And apparently, that was just the way she wanted it to
seem.
Everything had been
going so well. The information provided by Zane's kandra spy had been
accurate: Elend did try to make an alliance. The frightening
thing about it was that Straff might have gone along with it,
assuming Elend to be of no consequence, if the spy hadn't sent
warning.
Even so, Elend had
bested him. Straff had even been prepared for their feint of
weakness, and he had still fallen.
She's so
powerful . . . .
A figure in black
stepped out of the mists and walked up to Straff. "You look like
you've seen a ghost, Father," Zane said with a smile. "Your
own, perhaps?"
"Was there
anyone else out there, Zane?" Straff asked, too shaken for
repartee at the moment. "Another couple of Mistborn, perhaps,
helping her?"
Zane shook his
head. "No. She really is that strong." He turned to walk
back out into the mists.
"Zane!"
Straff snapped, making the man pause. "We're going to change
plans. I want you to kill her."
Zane turned. "But—"
"She's too
dangerous. Plus, we now have the information we wanted to get from
her. They don't have the atium."
"You believe
them?" Zane asked.
Straff paused.
After how thoroughly he'd been manipulated this evening, he wasn't
going to trust anything he thought he'd learned. "No," he
decided. "But we'll find it another way. I want that girl dead,
Zane."
"Are we
attacking the city for real, then?"
Straff almost gave
the order right then, commanding his armies to prepare for a morning
assault. The preliminary attack had gone well, showing that the
defenses were hardly impressive. Straff could take that wall, then
use it against Cett.
However, Elend's
final words before departing this evening made him stop. Send your
armies against my city, Father, the boy had said, and die.
You've felt her power—you know what she can do. You can try and
hide, you can even conquer my city.
But she will
find you. And she will kill you.
Your only option
is to wait. I'll contact you when my armies are prepared to attack
Cett. We'll strike together, as I said earlier.
Straff couldn't
depend on that. The boy had changed—had become strong, somehow.
If Straff and Elend attacked together, Straff had no illusions as to
how quickly he'd be betrayed. But Straff couldn't attack Luthadel
while that girl was alive. Not knowing her strength, having felt her
touch on his emotions.
"No," he
finally said to Zane's question. "We won't attack. Not until you
kill her."
"That might be
harder than you make it sound, Father," Zane said. "I'll
need some help."
"What kind of
help?"
"A strike
team. Allomancers that can't be traced."
Zane was speaking
of a particular group. Most Allomancers were easy to identify because
of their noble lineages. Straff, however, had access to some special
resources. There was a reason that he had so many mistresses—dozens
and dozens of them. Some thought it was just because he was lustful.
That wasn't it at
all. More mistresses meant more children. And more children, born
from a high noble line like his, meant more Allomancers. He'd only
spawned one Mistborn, but there were many Mistings.
"It will be
done," Straff said.
"They might
not survive the encounter, Father," Zane warned, still standing
in the mists.
That awful
sensation returned. The sense of nothingness, the horrible knowledge
that someone else had complete and total control over his emotions.
Nobody should have that much power over him. Especially not Elend.
He should be
dead. He came right to me. And I let him go.
"Get rid of
her," Straff said. "Do anything you need to, Zane.
Anything."
Zane nodded, then
walked away with a self-satisfied stroll.
Straff returned to
his tent and sent for Hoselle again. She looked enough like Elend's
girl. It would do him good to remind himself that most of the time,
he really was in control.
Elend sat back in
the carriage, a little stunned. I'm still alive! he thought
with growing excitement. I did it! I convinced Straff to leave the
city alone.
For a time, at
least. Luthadel's safety depended on Straff remaining frightened of
Vin. But . . . well, any victory was an enormous one for Elend. He
hadn't failed his people. He was their king, and his plan—crazy
though it might have seemed—had worked. The small crown on his
head suddenly didn't seem as heavy as it had before.
Vin sat across from
him. She didn't look nearly as pleased as she could have.
"We did it,
Vin!" Elend said. "It wasn't what we planned, but it
worked. Straff won't dare attack the city now."
She nodded quietly.
Elend frowned. "Um,
it's because of you that the city will be safe. You know that, right?
If you hadn't been there . . . well, of course, if it hadn't been for
you, the entire Final Empire would still be enslaved."
"Because I
killed the Lord Ruler," she said quietly.
Elend nodded.
"But it was
Kelsier's plan—the crew's skills, the people's strength
of will—that freed the empire. I just held the knife."
"You make it
sound like a trivial thing, Vin," he said. "It's not!
You're a fantastic Allomancer. Ham says he can't beat you even in an
unfair fight anymore, and you've kept the palace free of
assassins. There's nobody like you in all of the Final Empire!"
Strangely, his
words made her huddle into the corner just a little farther. She
turned, watching out the window, eyes staring into the mists. "Thank
you," she said softly.
Elend wrinkled his
brow. Every time I begin to think I've figured out what's going on
in her head . . . He moved over, putting an arm around her. "Vin,
what's wrong?"
She was silent,
then finally shook her head, forcing a smile. "It's nothing,
Elend. You're right to be excited. You were brilliant in there—I
doubt even Kelsier could have manipulated Straff so neatly."
Elend smiled, and
pulled her close, impatient as the carriage rolled up to the dark
city. The doors of Tin Gate opened hesitantly, and Elend saw a group
of men standing just inside of the courtyard. Ham held aloft a
lantern in the mists.
Elend didn't wait
for the carriage to stop on its own. He opened the door and hopped
down as it was rolling to a halt. His friends began to smile eagerly.
The gates thumped closed.
"It worked?"
Ham asked hesitantly as Elend approached. "You did it?"
"Kind of,"
Elend said with a smile, clasping hands with Ham, Breeze, Dockson,
and finally Spook. Even the kandra, OreSeur, was there. He padded
over to the carriage, waiting for Vin. "The initial feint didn't
go so well—my father didn't bite on an alliance. But then I
told him I'd kill him!"
"Wait. How was
that a good idea?" Ham asked.
"We overlooked
one of our greatest resources, my friends," Elend said as Vin
climbed down from the carriage. Elend turned, waving his hand toward
her. "We have a weapon like nothing they can match! Straff
expected me to come begging, and he was ready to control that
situation. However, when I mentioned what would happen to him and his
army if Vin's anger was roused . . . "
"My dear man,"
Breeze said. "You went into the camp of the strongest king in
the Final Empire, and you threatened him?"
"Yes I did!"
"Brilliant!"
"I know!"
Elend said. "I told my Father that he was going to let me
leave his camp and that he was going to leave Luthadel alone,
otherwise I'd have Vin kill him and every general in his army."
He put his arm around Vin. She smiled at the group, but he could tell
that something was still troubling her.
She doesn't
think I did a good job, Elend realized. She saw a better way
to manipulate Straff, but she doesn't want to spoil my enthusiasm.
"Well, guess
we won't need a new king," Spook said with a smile. "I was
kind of looking forward to taking the job . . . ."
Elend laughed. "I
don't intend to vacate the position for quite some time yet. We'll
let the people know that Straff has been cowed, if temporarily. That
should boost morale a bit. Then, we deal with the Assembly.
Hopefully, they'll pass a resolution to wait for me to meet with Cett
like I just did with Straff."
"Shall we have
a celebration back at the palace?" Breeze asked. "As fond
as I am of the mists, I doubt the courtyard is an appropriate place
to be discussing these issues."
Elend patted him on
the back and nodded. Ham and Dockson joined him and Vin, while the
others took the carriage they'd come in. Elend glanced oddly at
Dockson as he climbed into the carriage. Ordinarily, the man would
have chosen the other vehicle—the one Elend wasn't in.
"Honestly,
Elend," Ham said as he settled into his seat. "I'm
impressed. I half thought we were going to have to raid that camp to
get you back."
Elend smiled,
eyeing Dockson, who sat down as the carriage began moving. He pulled
open his satchel and took out a sealed envelope. He looked up and met
Elend's eyes. "This came from the Assembly members for you a
short time ago, Your Majesty."
Elend paused. Then
he took it and broke the seal. "What is it?"
"I'm not
sure," Dockson said. "But . . . I've already started
hearing rumors."
Vin leaned in,
reading over Elend's arm as he scanned the sheet inside. Your
Majesty, it read.
This
note is to inform you that by majority vote, the Assembly has decided
to invoke the charter's no-confidence clause. We appreciate your
efforts on behalf of the city, but the current situation calls for a
different kind of leadership than Your Majesty can provide. We take
this step with no hostility, but only resignation. We see no other
alternative, and must act for the good of Luthadel.
We
regret to have to inform you of this by letter.
It was signed by
all twenty-three members of the Assembly.
Elend lowered the
paper, shocked.
"What?"
Ham asked.
"I've just
been deposed," Elend said quietly.





PART THREE
KING
He left ruin in
his wake, but it was forgotten. He created kingdoms, and then
destroyed them as he made the world anew.





28
"LET ME SEE IF
I understand this correctly," Tindwyl said, calm and polite, yet
somehow still stern and disapproving. "There is a clause in the
kingdom's legal code that lets the Assembly overthrow their king?"
Elend wilted
slightly. "Yes."
"And you
wrote the law yourself?" Tindwyl demanded.
"Most of it,"
Elend admitted.
"You wrote
into your own law a way that you could be deposed?" Tindwyl
repeated. Their group—expanded from those who had met in the
carriages to include Clubs, Tindwyl, and Captain Demoux—sat in
Elend's study. The group's size was such that they'd run out of
chairs, and Vin sat quietly at the side, on a stack of Elend's books,
having quickly changed to trousers and shirt. Tindwyl and Elend were
standing, but the rest were seated—Breeze prim, Ham relaxed,
and Spook trying to balance his chair as he leaned back on two legs.
"I put in that
clause intentionally," Elend said. He stood at the front of the
room, leaning with one arm against the glass of his massive
stained-glass window, looking up at its dark shards. "This land
wilted beneath the hand of an oppressive ruler for a thousand years.
During that time, philosophers and thinkers dreamed of a government
where a bad ruler could be ousted without bloodshed. I took this
throne through an unpredictable and unique series of events, and I
didn't think it right to unilaterally impose my will—or the
will of my descendants—upon the people. I wanted to start a
government whose monarchs would be responsible to their subjects."
Sometimes, he
talks like those books he reads, Vin thought. Not like a
normal man at all . . . but like words on a page.
Zane's words came
back to her, seeming to whisper in her mind. You aren't like him.
She pushed the thought out.
"With respect,
Your Majesty," Tindwyl said, "this has to be one of the
most foolish things I've ever seen a leader do."
"It was for
the good of the kingdom," Elend said.
"It was sheer
idiocy," Tindwyl snapped. "A king doesn't subject himself
to the whims of another ruling body. He is valuable to his people
because he is an absolute authority!"
Vin had rarely seen
Elend so sorrowful, and she cringed a bit at the sadness in his eyes.
However, a different piece of her was rebelliously happy. He wasn't
king anymore. Now maybe people wouldn't work so hard to kill him.
Maybe he could just be Elend again, and they could leave. Go
somewhere. A place where things weren't so complicated.
"Regardless,"
Dockson said to the quiet room, "something must be done.
Discussing the prudence of decisions already past has little current
relevance."
"Agreed,"
Ham said. "So, the Assembly tried to kick you out. What are we
going to do about it?"
"We obviously
can't let them have their way," Breeze said. "Why, the
people overthrew a government just last year! This is a bad habit to
be getting into, I should think."
"We need to
prepare a response, Your Majesty," Dockson said. "Something
decrying this deceitful maneuver, performed while you were
negotiating for the very safety of the city. Now that I look back,
it's obvious that they arranged this meeting so that you couldn't
be present and defend yourself."
Elend nodded, still
staring up at the dark glass. "There's probably no need to call
me Your Majesty anymore, Dox."
"Nonsense,"
Tindwyl said, arms folded as she stood beside a bookcase. "You
are still king."
"I've lost the
mandate of the people," Elend said.
"Yes,"
Clubs said, "but you've still got the mandate of my armies. That
makes you king no matter what the Assembly says."
"Exactly,"
Tindwyl said. "Foolish laws aside, you're still in a position of
power. We need to tighten martial law, restrict movement within the
city. Seize control of key points, and sequester the members of the
Assembly so that your enemies can't raise a resistance against you."
"I'll have my
men on the streets before light," Clubs said.
"No,"
Elend said quietly.
There was a pause.
"Your
Majesty?" Dockson asked. "It really is the best move. We
can't let this faction against you gain momentum."
"It's not a
faction, Dox," Elend said. "It's the elected
representatives of the Assembly."
"An Assembly
you formed, my dear man," Breeze said. "They have power
because you gave it to them."
"The law gives
them their power, Breeze," Elend said. "And we are all
subject to it."
"Nonsense,"
Tindwyl said. "As king, you are the law. Once we secure the
city, you can call in the Assembly and explain to its members that
you need their support. Those who disagree can be held until the
crisis is over."
"No,"
Elend said, a little more firm. "We will do none of that."
"That's it,
then?" Ham asked. "You're giving up?"
"I'm not
giving up, Ham," Elend said, finally turning to regard the
group. "But I'm not going to use the city's armies to pressure
the Assembly."
"You'll lose
your throne," Breeze said.
"See reason,
Elend," Ham said with a nod.
"I will not
be an exception to my own laws!" Elend said.
"Don't be a
fool," Tindwyl said. "You should—"
"Tindwyl,"
Elend said, "respond to my ideas as you wish, but do not call me
a fool again. I will not be belittled because I express my opinion!"
Tindwyl paused,
mouth partially open. Then she pressed her lips together and took her
seat. Vin felt a quiet surge of satisfaction. You trained him,
Tindwyl, she thought with a smile. Can you really complain if
he stands up to you?
Elend walked
forward, placing his hands on the table as he regarded the group.
"Yes, we will respond. Dox, you write a letter informing the
Assembly of our disappointment and feelings of betrayal—inform
them of our success with Straff, and lay on the guilt as thickly as
possible.
"The rest of
us will begin planning. We'll get the throne back. As has been
stated, I know the law. I wrote it. There are ways to deal with this.
Those ways do not, however, include sending our armies to
secure the city. I will not be like the tyrants who would take
Luthadel from us! I will not force the people to do my will, even if
I know it is best for them."
"Your
Majesty," Tindwyl said carefully, "there is nothing immoral
about securing your power during a time of chaos. People react
irrationally during such times. That is one of the reasons why they
need strong leadership. They need you."
"Only if they
want me, Tindwyl," Elend said.
"Forgive me,
Your Majesty," Tindwyl said, "but that statement seems
somewhat naive to me."
Elend smiled.
"Perhaps it is. You can change my clothing and my bearing, but
you can't change the soul of who I am. I'll do what I think is
right—and that includes letting the Assembly depose me, if that
is their choice."
Tindwyl frowned.
"And if you can't get your throne back through lawful means?"
"Then I accept
that fact," Elend said. "And do my best to help the kingdom
anyway."
So much for
running away, Vin thought. However, she couldn't help smiling.
Part of what she loved about Elend was his sincerity. His simple love
for the people of Luthadel—his determination to do what was
right for them—was what separated him from Kelsier. Even in
martyrdom, Kelsier had displayed a hint of arrogance. He'd made
certain that he would be remembered like few men who had ever lived.
But Elend—to
him, ruling the Central Dominance wasn't about fame or glory. For the
first time, completely and honestly, she decided something. Elend was
a far better king than Kelsier would ever have been.
"I'm . . . not
certain what I think of this experience, Mistress," a voice
whispered beside her. Vin paused, looking down as she realized that
she had begun idly scratching OreSeur's ears.
She pulled her hand
back with a start. "Sorry," she said.
OreSeur shrugged,
resting his head back on his paws.
"So, you said
there's a legal way to get the throne back," Ham said. "How
do we go about it?"
"The Assembly
has one month to choose a new king," Elend said. "Nothing
in the law says that the new king can't be the same as the old one.
And, if they can't come up with a majority decision by that deadline,
the throne reverts to me for a minimum of one year."
"Complicated,"
Ham said, rubbing his chin.
"What did you
expect?" Breeze said. "It's the law."
"I didn't mean
the law itself," Ham said. "I meant getting the Assembly to
either choose Elend or not choose anyone. They wouldn't have deposed
him in the first place unless they had another person in mind for the
throne."
"Not
necessarily," Dockson said. "Perhaps they simply meant this
as a warning."
"Perhaps,"
Elend said. "Gentlemen, I think this is a sign. I've been
ignoring the Assembly—we thought that they were taken care of,
since I got them to sign that proposal giving me right of parlay.
However, we never realized that an easy way for them to get around
that proposal was to choose a new king, then have him do as
they wished."
He sighed, shaking
his head. "I have to admit, I've never been very good at
handling the Assembly. They don't see me as a king, but as a
colleague—and because of that, they can easily see themselves
taking my place. I'll bet one of the Assemblymen has convinced the
others to put him on the throne instead."
"So, we just
make him disappear," Ham said. "I'm sure Vin could . . . "
Elend frowned.
"I'm joking,
El," Ham said.
"You know,
Ham," Breeze noted. "The only funny thing about your jokes
is how often they lack any humor whatsoever."
"You're only
saying that because they usually involve you in the punch line."
Breeze rolled his
eyes.
"You know,"
OreSeur muttered quietly, obviously counting on her tin to let Vin
hear him, "it seems that these meetings would be more productive
if someone forgot to invite those two."
Vin smiled.
"They're not that bad," she whispered.
OreSeur raised an
eyebrow.
"Okay,"
Vin said. "They do distract us a little bit."
"I could
always eat one of them, if you wish," OreSeur said. "That
might speed things up."
Vin paused.
OreSeur, however,
had a strange little smile on his lips. "Kandra humor, Mistress.
I apologize. We can be a bit grim."
Vin smiled. "They
probably wouldn't taste very good anyway. Ham's far too stringy, and
you don't want to know the kinds of things that Breeze spends his
time eating . . . ."
"I'm not
sure," OreSeur said. "One is, after all, named 'Ham.' As
for the other . . . " He nodded to the cup of wine in Breeze's
hand. "He does seem quite fond of marinating himself."
Elend was picking
through his stacks of books, pulling out several relevant volumes on
law—including the book of Luthadel law that he himself had
written.
"Your
Majesty," Tindwyl said, emphasizing the term. "You have two
armies on your doorstep, and a group of koloss making their way into
the Central Dominance. Do you honestly think that you have time for a
protracted legal battle now?"
Elend set down the
books and pulled his chair to the table. "Tindwyl," he
said. "I have two armies on my doorstep, koloss coming to
pressure them, and I myself am the main obstacle keeping the leaders
of this city from handing the kingdom over to one of the invaders. Do
you honestly think that it's a coincidence that I get deposed now?"
Several members of
the crew perked up at this, and Vin cocked her head.
"You think one
of the invaders might be behind this?" Ham asked, rubbing his
chin.
"What would
you do, if you were them?" Elend said, opening a book. "You
can't attack the city, because it will cost you too many troops. The
siege has already lasted weeks, your troops are getting cold, and the
men Dockson hired have been attacking your canal supply barges,
threatening your food supply. Add on top of that, you know that a
large force of koloss are marching this way . . . and, well, it makes
sense. If Straff and Cett's spies are any good, they'll know that the
Assembly just about capitulated and gave the city away when that army
first arrived. Assassins have failed to kill me, but if there were
another way to remove me . . . "
"Yes,"
Breeze said. "This does sound like something Cett would do. Turn
the Assembly against you, put a sympathizer on the throne, then get
him to open the gates."
Elend nodded. "And
my father seemed hesitant to side with me this evening, as if he felt
he had some other way to get the city. I can't be certain if either
monarch is behind this move, Tindwyl, but we certainly can't ignore
the possibility. This isn't a distraction—this is very much
part of the same siege tactics we've been fighting since those armies
arrived. If I can put myself back on the throne, then Straff and Cett
will know that I'm the only one they can work with—and that
will, hopefully, make them more likely to side with me in
desperation, particularly as those koloss draw near."
With that, Elend
began riffling through a stack of books. His depression seemed to be
abating in face of this new academic problem. "There might be a
few other clauses of relevance in the law," he half mumbled. "I
need to do some studying. Spook, did you invite Sazed to this
meeting?"
Spook shrugged. "I
couldn't get him to wake up."
"He's
recovering from his trip here," Tindwyl said, turning away from
her study of Elend and his books. "It's an issue of the
Keepers."
"Needs to
refill one of his metalminds?" Ham asked.
Tindwyl paused, her
expression darkening. "He explained that to you, then?"
Ham and Breeze
nodded.
"I see,"
Tindwyl said. "Regardless, he could not help with this problem,
Your Majesty. I give you some small aid in the area of government
because it is my duty to train leaders in knowledge of the past.
However, traveling Keepers such as Sazed do not take sides in
political matters."
"Political
matters?" Breeze asked lightly. "You mean, perhaps, like
overthrowing the Final Empire?"
Tindwyl closed her
mouth, lips growing thin. "You should not encourage him to break
his vows," she finally said. "If you were his friends, you
would see that to be true, I think."
"Oh?"
Breeze asked, pointing at her with his cup of wine. "Personally,
I think you're just embarrassed that he disobeyed you all, but then
actually ended up freeing your people."
Tindwyl gave Breeze
a flat stare, her eyes narrow, her posture stiff. They sat that way
for a long moment. "Push on my emotions all you wish, Soother,"
Tindwyl said. "My feelings are my own. You will have no success
here."
Breeze finally
turned back to his drink, muttering something about "damn
Terrismen."
Elend, however,
wasn't paying attention to the argument. He already had four books
open on the table before him, and was flipping through a fifth. Vin
smiled, remembering the days—not so long ago—when his
courtship of her had often involved him plopping himself down in a
nearby chair and opening a book.
He is the same
man, she thought. And that soul, that man, is the one who
loved me before he knew I was Mistborn. He loved me even after he
discovered I was a thief, and thought I was trying to rob him. I need
to remember that.
"Come on,"
she whispered to OreSeur, standing as Breeze and Ham got into another
argument. She needed time to think, and the mists were still fresh.
This would be a
lot easier if I weren't so skilled, Elend thought with amusement,
poking through his books. I set up the law too well.
He followed a
particular passage with his finger, rereading it as the crew slowly
trailed away. He couldn't remember if he'd dismissed them or not.
Tindwyl would probably chastise him for that.
Here, he
thought, tapping the page. I might have grounds to argue for a
revote if any of the members of the Assembly arrived late to the
meeting, or made their votes in absentia. The vote to depose had
to be unanimous—save, of course, for the king being deposed.
He paused, noticing
movement. Tindwyl was the only one still in the room with him. He
looked up from his books with resignation. I probably have this
coming . . . .
"I apologize
for treating you with disrespect, Your Majesty," she said.
Elend frowned.
Wasn't expecting that.
"I have a
habit of treating people like children," Tindwyl said. "It
is not something that I should be proud of, I think."
"It's—"
Elend paused. Tindwyl had taught him never to excuse people's
failings. He could accept people with failings—even forgive
them—but if he glossed over the problems, then they would never
change. "I accept your apology," he said.
"You've
learned quickly, Your Majesty."
"I haven't had
much choice," Elend said with a smile. "Of course, I didn't
change fast enough for the Assembly."
"How did you
let this happen?" she asked quietly. "Even considering our
disagreement over how a government should be run, I should think that
these Assemblymen would be supporters of yours. You gave them their
power."
"I ignored
them, Tindwyl. Powerful men, friends or not, never like being
ignored."
She nodded.
"Though, perhaps we should pause to take note of your successes,
rather than simply focusing on your failings. Vin tells me that your
meeting with your father went well."
Elend smiled. "We
scared him into submission. It felt very good to do something like
that to Straff. But, I think I might have offended Vin somehow."
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow.
Elend set down his
book, leaning forward with his arms on the desk. "She was in an
odd mood on the way back. I could barely get her to talk to me. I'm
not sure what it was."
"Perhaps she
was just tired."
"I'm not
convinced that Vin gets tired," Elend said. "She's
always moving, always doing something. Sometimes, I worry that she
thinks I'm lazy. Maybe that's why . . . " He trailed off, then
shook his head.
"She doesn't
think that you are lazy, Your Majesty," Tindwyl said. "She
refused to marry you because she doesn't think that she is worthy of
you."
"Nonsense,"
Elend said. "Vin's Mistborn, Tindwyl. She knows she's worth ten
men like me."
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow. "You understand very little about women, Elend
Venture—especially young women. To them, their competence has a
surprisingly small amount to do with how they feel about themselves.
Vin is insecure. She doesn't believe that she deserves to be with
you—it is less that she doesn't think she deserves you
personally, and more that she isn't convinced that she deserves to be
happy at all. She has led a very confusing, difficult life."
"How sure are
you about this?"
"I've raised a
number of daughters, Your Majesty," Tindwyl said. "I
understand the things of which I speak."
"Daughters?"
Elend asked. "You have children?"
"Of course."
"I just . . .
" The Terrismen he'd known were eunuchs, like Sazed. The same
couldn't be true for a woman like Tindwyl, of course, but he'd
assumed that the Lord Ruler's breeding programs would have affected
her somehow.
"Regardless,"
Tindwyl said curtly, "you must make some decisions, Your
Majesty. Your relationship with Vin is going to be difficult. She has
certain issues that will provide more problems than you would find in
a more conventional woman."
"We've already
discussed this," Elend said. "I'm not looking for a more
'conventional' woman. I love Vin."
"I'm not
implying that you shouldn't," Tindwyl said calmly. "I am
simply giving you instruction, as I have been asked to do. You need
to decide how much you're going to let the girl, and your
relationship with her, distract you."
"What makes
you think I'm distracted?"
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow. "I asked you about your success with Lord Venture this
evening, and all you wanted to talk about was how Vin felt during the
ride home."
Elend hesitated.
"Which is more
important to you, Your Majesty?" Tindwyl asked. "This
girl's love, or the good of your people?"
"I'm not going
to answer a question like that," Elend said.
"Eventually,
you may not have a choice," Tindwyl said. "It is a question
most kings face eventually, I fear."
"No,"
Elend said. "There's no reason that I can't both love Vin and
protect my people. I've studied too many hypothetical dilemmas to be
caught in a trap like that."
Tindwyl shrugged,
standing. "Believe as you wish, Your Majesty. However, I already
see a dilemma, and I find it not at all hypothetical." She bowed
her head slightly in deference, then withdrew from the room, leaving
him with his books.
There were other
proofs to connect Alendi to the Hero of Ages. Smaller things, things
that only one trained in the lore of the Anticipation would have
noticed. The birthmark on his arm. The way his hair turned gray when
he was barely twenty and five years of age. The way he spoke, the way
he treated people, the way he ruled.
He simply seemed
to fit.





29
"TELL ME,
MISTRESS," ORESEUR SAID, lying lazily, head on paws. "I
have been around humans for a goodly number of years. I was under the
impression that they needed regular sleep. I guess I was mistaken."
Vin sat on a
wall-top stone ledge, one leg up against her chest, the other
dangling over the side of the wall. Keep Hasting's towers were dark
shadows in the mists to her right and to her left. "I sleep,"
she said.
"Occasionally."
OreSeur yawned a deep, tongue-stretching yawn. Was he adopting more
canine mannerisms?
Vin turned away
from the kandra, looking east, over the slumbering city of Luthadel.
There was a fire in the distance, a growing light that was too large
to be of man's touch. Dawn had arrived. Another night had passed,
making it nearly a week since she and Elend had visited Straff's
army. Zane had yet to appear.
"You're
burning pewter, aren't you?" OreSeur asked. "To stay
awake?"
Vin nodded. Beneath
a light burn of pewter, her fatigue was only a mild annoyance. She
could feel it deep within her, if she looked hard, but it had no
power over her. Her senses were keen, her body strong. Even the
night's cold wasn't as bothersome. The moment she extinguished her
pewter, however, she'd feel the exhaustion in force.
"That cannot
be healthy, Mistress," OreSeur said. "You sleep barely
three or four hours a day. Nobody—Mistborn, man, or kandra—can
survive on a schedule like that for long."
Vin looked down.
How could she explain her strange insomnia? She should be over that;
she no longer had to be frightened of the other crewmembers around
her. And yet, no matter how exhausted she grew, she was finding sleep
more and more difficult to claim. How could she sleep, with that
quiet thumping in the distance?
It seemed to be
getting closer, for some reason. Or simply stronger? I hear the
thumping sounds from above, the pulsings from the mountains. . .
. Words from the logbook.
How could she
sleep, knowing that the spirit watched her from the mist, ominous and
hateful? How could she sleep when armies threatened to slaughter her
friends, when Elend's kingdom had been taken from him, when
everything she thought she'd known and loved was getting muddled and
obscure?
. . . when I
finally lie down, I find sleep elusive. The same thoughts that
trouble me during the day are only compounded by the stillness of
night . . . .
OreSeur yawned
again. "He's not coming, Mistress."
Vin turned,
frowning. "What do you mean?"
"This is the
last place you sparred with Zane," OreSeur said. "You're
waiting for him to come."
Vin paused. "I
could use a spar," she finally said.
Light continued to
grow in the east, slowly brightening the mists. The mists persisted,
however, reticent to give way before the sun.
"You shouldn't
let that man influence you so, Mistress," OreSeur said. "I
do not think he is the person you believe him to be."
Vin frowned. "He's
my enemy. What else would I believe?"
"You do not
treat him like an enemy, Mistress."
"Well, he
hasn't attacked Elend," Vin said. "Maybe Zane isn't fully
under Straff's control."
OreSeur sat
quietly, head on paws. Then he turned away.
"What?"
Vin asked.
"Nothing,
Mistress. I will believe as I'm told."
"Oh, no,"
Vin said, turning on the ledge to look at him. "You're not going
back to that excuse. What were you thinking?"
OreSeur sighed. "I
was thinking, Mistress, that your fixation with Zane is
disconcerting."
"Fixation?"
Vin said. "I'm just keeping an eye on him. I don't like having
another Mistborn—enemy or not—running around in my city.
Who knows what he could be up to?"
OreSeur frowned,
but said nothing.
"OreSeur,"
Vin said, "if you have things to say, speak!"
"I apologize,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "I'm not accustomed to chatting
with my masters—especially not candidly."
"It's all
right. Just speak your mind."
"Well,
Mistress," OreSeur said, raising his head off his paws, "I
do not like this Zane."
"What do you
know of him?"
"Nothing more
than you," OreSeur admitted. "However, most kandra are very
good judges of character. When you practice imitation for as long as
I have, you learn to see to the hearts of men. I do not like what I
have seen of Zane. He seems too pleased with himself. He seems too
deliberate in the way he has befriended you. He makes me
uncomfortable."
Vin sat on the
ledge, legs parted, hands before her with palms down, resting on the
cool stone. He might be right.
But, OreSeur hadn't
flown with Zane, hadn't sparred in the mists. Through no fault of his
own, OreSeur was like Elend. Not an Allomancer. Neither of them could
understand what it was to soar on a Push of steel, to flare tin and
experience the sudden shock of five heightened senses. They couldn't
know. They couldn't understand.
Vin leaned back.
Then, she regarded the wolfhound in the growing light. There was
something she'd been meaning to mention, and now seemed as good a
time as any. "OreSeur, you can switch bodies, if you want."
The wolfhound
raised an eyebrow.
"We have those
bones that we found in the palace," Vin said. "You can use
those, if you're tired of being a dog."
"I couldn't
use them," OreSeur said. "I haven't digested their body—I
wouldn't know the proper arrangement of muscles and organs to make
the person look correct."
"Well, then,"
Vin said. "We could get you a criminal."
"I thought you
liked these bones on me," OreSeur said.
"I do,"
Vin said. "But, I don't want you to stay in a body that makes
you unhappy."
OreSeur snorted.
"My happiness is not an issue."
"It is to me,"
Vin said. "We could—"
"Mistress,"
OreSeur interrupted.
"Yes?"
"I shall keep
these bones. I've grown accustomed to them. It is very frustrating to
change forms often."
Vin hesitated. "All
right," she finally said.
OreSeur nodded.
"Though," he continued, "speaking of bodies, Mistress,
are we ever planning to return to the palace? Not all of us have the
constitution of a Mistborn—some people need sleep and food on
occasion."
He certainly
complains a lot more now, Vin thought. However, she found the
attitude to be a good sign; it meant OreSeur was growing more
comfortable with her. Comfortable enough to tell her when he thought
she was being stupid.
Why do I even
bother with Zane? she thought, rising and turning eyes northward.
The mist was still moderately strong, and she could barely make out
Straff's army, still holding the northern canal, maintaining the
siege. It sat like a spider, waiting for the right time to spring.
Elend, she
thought. I should be more focused on Elend. His motions to
dismiss the Assembly's decision, or to force a revote, had all
failed. And, stubbornly lawful as always, Elend continued to accept
his failures. He still thought he had a chance to persuade the
Assembly to choose him as king—or at least not vote anybody
else to the position.
So he worked on
speeches and planned with Breeze and Dockson. This left him little
time for Vin, and rightly so. The last thing he needed was her
distracting him. This was something she couldn't help him
with—something she couldn't fight or scare away.
His world is of
papers, books, laws, and philosophies, she thought. He rides
the words of his theories like I ride the mists. I always worry that
he can't understand me . . . but can I really even understand him?
OreSeur stood,
stretched, and placed his forepaws on the wall's railing to raise
himself and look north, like Vin.
Vin shook her head.
"Sometimes, I wish Elend weren't so . . . well, noble. The city
doesn't need this confusion right now."
"He did the
right thing, Mistress."
"You think
so?"
"Of course,"
OreSeur said. "He made a contract. It is his duty to keep that
contract, no matter what. He must serve his master—in his case,
that would be the city—even if that master makes him do
something very distasteful."
"That's a very
kandralike way of seeing things," Vin said.
OreSeur looked up
at her, raising a canine eyebrow, as if to ask Well, what did you
expect? She smiled; she had to suppress a chuckle every time she
saw that expression on his dog face.
"Come on,"
Vin said. "Let's get back to the palace."
"Excellent,"
OreSeur said, dropping down to all fours. "That meat I set out
should be perfect by now."
"Unless the
maids found it again," Vin said with a smile.
OreSeur's
expression darkened. "I thought you were going to warn them."
"What would I
say?" Vin asked with amusement. "Please don't throw away
this rancid meat—my dog likes to eat it?"
"Why not?"
OreSeur asked. "When I imitate a human, I almost never get to
have a good meal, but dogs eat aged meat sometimes, don't they?"
"I honestly
don't know," Vin said.
"Aged meat is
delicious."
"You mean
'rotten' meat."
"Aged,"
OreSeur said insistently as she picked him up, preparing to carry him
down from the wall. The top of Keep Hasting was a good hundred feet
tall—far too high up for OreSeur to jump, and the only path
down would be through the inside of the abandoned keep. Better to
carry him.
"Aged meat is
like aged wine or aged cheese," OreSeur continued. "It
tastes better when it's a few weeks old."
I suppose that's
one of the side effects of being related to scavengers, Vin
thought. She hopped up on the lip of the wall, dropping a few coins.
However, as she prepared to jump—OreSeur a large bulk in her
arms—she hesitated. She turned one last time, looking out at
Straff's army. It was fully visible now; the sun had risen completely
above the horizon. Yet, a few insistent swirls of mist wavered in the
air, as if trying to defy the sun, to continue to cloak the city, to
stave off the light of day . . . .
Lord Ruler!
Vin thought, struck by a sudden insight. She'd been working on this
problem so long, it had begun to frustrate her. And now, when she'd
been ignoring it, the answer had come to her. As if her subconscious
had still been picking it apart.
"Mistress?"
OreSeur asked. "Is everything all right?"
Vin opened her
mouth slightly, cocking her head. "I think I just realized what
the Deepness was."
But, I must
continue with the sparsest of detail. Space is limited. The other
Worldbringers must have thought themselves humble when they came to
me, admitting that they had been wrong. Even then, I was beginning to
doubt my original declaration.
But, I was
prideful.





30
I
write this record now, Sazed read, pounding it into a metal
slab, because I am afraid. Afraid for myself, yes—I admit to
being human. If Alendi does return from the Well of Ascension, I am
certain that my death will be one of his first objectives. He is not
an evil man, but he is a ruthless one. That is, I think, a product of
what he has been through.
I
am also afraid, however, that all I have known—that my
story—will be forgotten. I am afraid for the world that is to
come. Afraid that Alendi will fail. Afraid of a doom brought by the
Deepness.
It
all comes back to poor Alendi. I feel bad for him, and for all the
things he has been forced to endure. For what he has been forced to
become.
But,
let me begin at the beginning. I met Alendi first in Khlennium; he
was a young lad then, and had not yet been warped by a decade spent
leading armies.
Alendi's
height struck me the first time I saw him. Here was a man who was
small of stature, but who seemed to tower over others, a man who
demanded respect.
Oddly,
it was Alendi's simple ingenuousness that first led me to befriend
him. I employed him as an assistant during his first months in the
grand city.
It
wasn't until years later that I became convinced that Alendi was the
Hero of Ages. Hero of Ages: the one called Rabzeen in Khlennium, the
Anamnesor.
Savior.
When
I finally had the realization—finally connected all of the
signs of the Anticipation to him—I was so excited. Yet, when I
announced my discovery to the other Worldbringers, I was met with
scorn. Oh, how I wish that I had listened to them.
And
yet, any who know me will realize that there was no chance I would
give up so easily. Once I find something to investigate, I become
dogged in my pursuit. I had determined that Alendi was the Hero of
Ages, and I intended to prove it. I should have bowed before the will
of the others; I shouldn't have insisted on traveling with Alendi to
witness his journeys. It was inevitable that Alendi himself would
find out what I believed him to be.
Yes,
he was the one who fueled the rumors after that. I could never have
done what he himself did, convincing and persuading the world that he
was indeed the Hero. I don't know if he himself believed it, but he
made others think that he must be the one.
If
only the Terris religion, and belief in the Anticipation, hadn't
spread beyond our people. If only the Deepness hadn't come, providing
a threat that drove men to desperation both in action and belief. If
only I had passed over Alendi when looking for an assistant, all
those years ago.
Sazed sat back from
his work of transcribing the rubbing. There was still a great deal to
do—it was amazing how much writing this Kwaan had managed to
cram onto the relatively small sheet of steel.
Sazed looked over
his work. He'd spent his entire trip north anticipating the time when
he could finally begin work on the rubbing. A part of him had been
worried. Would the dead man's words seem as important sitting in a
well-lit room as they had when in the dungeons of the Conventical of
Seran?
He scanned to
another part of the document, reading a few choice paragraphs. Ones
of particular importance to him.
As
the one who found Alendi, however, I became someone important.
Foremost amongst the Worldbringers.
There
was a place for me, in the lore of the Anticipation—I thought
myself the Announcer, the prophet foretold to discover the Hero of
Ages. Renouncing Alendi then would have been to renounce my new
position, my acceptance, by the others.
And
so I did not.
But
I do so now. Let it be known that I, Kwaan, Worldbringer of Terris,
am a fraud.
Sazed closed his
eyes. Worldbringer. The term was known to him; the order of
the Keepers had been founded upon memories and hopes from Terris
legends. The Worldbringers had been teachers, Feruchemists who had
traveled the lands bearing knowledge. They had been a prime
inspiration for the secret order of Keepers.
And now he had a
document made by a Worldbringer's own hand.
Tindwyl is going
to be very annoyed with me, Sazed thought, opening his eyes. He'd
read the entire rubbing, but he would need to spend time studying it.
Memorizing it. Cross-referencing it with other documents. This one
bit of writing—perhaps twenty pages total—could easily
keep him busy for months, even years.
His window shutters
rattled. Sazed looked up. He was in his quarters at the palace—a
tasteful collection of well-decorated rooms that were far too lavish
for one who had spent his life as a servant. He rose, walked over to
the window, undid the latch, and pulled open the shutters. He smiled
as he found Vin crouching on the ledge outside.
"Um . . . hi,"
Vin said. She wore her mistcloak over gray shirt and black trousers.
Despite the onset of morning, she obviously hadn't yet gone to bed
after her nightly prowling. "You should leave your window
unlatched. I can't get in if it's locked. Elend got mad at me for
breaking too many latches."
"I shall try
to remember that, Lady Vin," Sazed said, and gesturing for her
to enter.
Vin hopped spryly
through the window, mistcloak rustling. "Try to
remember?" she asked. "You never forget anything. Not even
the things you don't have stuck in a metalmind."
She's grown so
much more bold, he thought as she walked over to his writing
desk, peering over his work. Even in the months I've been away.
"What's this?"
Vin asked, still looking at the desk.
"I found it at
the Conventical of Seran, Lady Vin," Sazed said, walking
forward. It felt so good to be wearing clean robes again, to have a
quiet and comfortable place in which to study. Was he a bad man for
preferring this to travel?
One month,
he thought. I will give myself one month of study. Then I will
turn the project over to someone else.
"What is it?"
Vin asked, holding up the rubbing.
"If you
please, Lady Vin," Sazed said apprehensively. "That is
quite fragile. The rubbing could be smudged . . . ."
Vin nodded, putting
it down and scanning his transcription. There had been a time when
she would have avoided anything that smelled of stuffy writing, but
now she looked intrigued. "This mentions the Deepness!" she
said with excitement.
"Among other
things," Sazed said, joining her at the desk. He sat down, and
Vin walked over to one of the room's low-backed, plush chairs.
However, she didn't sit on it as an ordinary person would; instead,
she hopped up and sat down on the top of the chair's back, her feet
resting on the seat cushion.
"What?"
she asked, apparently noticing Sazed's smile.
"Just amused
at a proclivity of Mistborn, Lady Vin," he said. "Your kind
has trouble simply sitting—it seems you always want to perch
instead. That is what comes from having such an incredible sense of
balance, I think."
Vin frowned, but
passed over the comment. "Sazed," she said, "what was
the Deepness?"
He laced his
fingers before himself, regarding the young woman as he mused. "The
Deepness, Lady Vin? That is a subject of much debate, I think. It was
supposedly something great and powerful, though some scholars have
dismissed the entire legend as a fabrication concocted by the Lord
Ruler. There is some reason to believe this theory, I think, for the
only real records of those times are the ones sanctioned by the Steel
Ministry."
"But, the
logbook mentions the Deepness," Vin said. "And so does that
thing you're translating now."
"Indeed, Lady
Vin," Sazed said. "But, even among those who assume the
Deepness was real, there is a great deal of debate. Some hold to the
Lord Ruler's official story, that the Deepness was a horrible,
supernatural beast—a dark god, if you will. Others disagree
with this extreme interpretation. They think the Deepness was more
mundane—an army of some sort, perhaps invaders from another
land. The Farmost Dominance, during pre-Ascension times, was
apparently populated with several breeds of men who were quite
primitive and warlike."
Vin was smiling. He
looked at her questioningly, and she just shrugged. "I asked
Elend this same question," she explained, "and I got barely
a sentence-long response."
"His Majesty
has different areas of scholarship; pre-Ascension history may be too
stuffy a topic even for him. Besides, anyone who asks a Keeper about
the past should be prepared for an extended conversation, I think."
"I'm not
complaining," Vin said. "Continue."
"There isn't
much more to say—or, rather, there is a great deal more to say,
but I doubt much of it has relevance. Was the Deepness an army? Was
it, perhaps, the first attack from koloss, as some theorize? That
would explain much—most stories agree that the Lord Ruler
gained some power to defeat the Deepness at the Well of Ascension.
Perhaps he gained the support of the koloss, and then used them as
his armies."
"Sazed,"
Vin said. "I don't think the Deepness was the koloss."
"Oh?"
"I think it
was the mist."
"That theory
has been proposed," Sazed said with a nod.
"It has?"
Vin asked, sounding a bit disappointed.
"Of course,
Lady Vin. During the thousand-year reign of the Final Empire, there
are few possibilities that haven't been discussed, I think.
The mist theory has been advanced before, but there are several large
problems with it."
"Such as?"
"Well,"
Sazed said, "for one thing, the Lord Ruler is said to have
defeated the Deepness. However, the mist is obviously still here.
Also, if the Deepness was simply mist, why call it by such an obscure
name? Of course, others point out that much of what we know or have
heard of the Deepness comes from oral lore, and something very common
can take on mystical properties when transferred verbally through
generations. The 'Deepness' therefore could mean not just the mist,
but the event of its coming or alteration.
"The larger
problem with the mist theory, however, is one of malignance. If we
trust the accounts—and we have little else to go on—the
Deepness was terrible and destructive. The mist seems to display none
of this danger."
"But it kills
people now."
Sazed paused. "Yes,
Lady Vin. It apparently does."
"And what if
it did so before, but the Lord Ruler stopped it somehow? You yourself
said that you think we did something—something that changed the
mist—when we killed the Lord Ruler."
Sazed nodded. "The
problems I have been investigating are quite terrible, to be certain.
However, I do not see that they could be a threat on the same level
as the Deepness. Certain people have been killed by the mists, but
many are elderly or otherwise lacking in constitution. It leaves many
people alone."
He paused, tapping
his thumbs together. "But, I would be remiss if I didn't admit
some merit to the suggestion, Lady Vin. Perhaps even a few deaths
would be enough to cause a panic. The danger could have been
exaggerated by retelling—and, perhaps the killings were more
widespread before. I haven't been able to collect enough information
to be certain of anything yet."
Vin didn't respond.
Oh, dear, Sazed thought, sighing to himself. I've bored
her. I really do need to be more careful, watching my vocabulary and
my language. One would think that after all my travels among the
skaa, I would have learned—
"Sazed?"
Vin said, sounding thoughtful. "What if we're looking at it
wrong? What if these random deaths in the mists aren't the problem at
all?"
"What do you
mean, Lady Vin?"
She sat quietly for
a moment, one foot tapping back idly against the chair's back
cushion. She finally looked up, meeting his eyes. "What would
happen if the mists came during the day permanently?"
Sazed mused on that
for a moment.
"There would
be no light," Vin continued. "Plants would die, people
would starve. There would be death . . . chaos."
"I suppose,"
Sazed said. "Perhaps that theory has merit."
"It's not a
theory," Vin said, hopping down from her chair. "It's what
happened."
"You're so
certain, already?" Sazed asked with amusement.
Vin nodded curtly,
joining him at the desk. "I'm right," she said with her
characteristic bluntness. "I know it." She pulled something
out of a trouser pocket, then drew over a stool to sit beside him.
She unfolded the wrinkled sheet and flattened it on the desk.
"These are
quotes from the logbook," Vin said. She pointed at a paragraph.
"Here the Lord Ruler talks about how armies were useless against
the Deepness. At first, I thought this meant that the armies hadn't
been able to defeat it—but look at the wording. He says 'The
swords of my armies are useless.' What's more useless than trying to
swing a sword at mist?"
She pointed at
another paragraph. "It left destruction in its wake, right?
Countless thousands died because of it. But, he never says that the
Deepness actually attacked them. He says that they 'died because of
it.' Maybe we've just been looking at this the wrong way all along.
Those people weren't crushed or eaten. They starved to death because
their land was slowly being swallowed by the mists."
Sazed studied her
paper. She seemed so certain. Did she know nothing of proper research
techniques? Of questioning, of studying, of postulating and devising
answers?
Of course she
doesn't, Sazed chastised himself. She grew up on the
streets—she doesn't use research techniques.
She just uses
instinct. And she's usually right.
He smoothed the
paper again, reading its passages. "Lady Vin? Did you write this
yourself?"
She flushed. "Why
is everybody so surprised about that?"
"It just
doesn't seem in your nature, Lady Vin."
"You people
have corrupted me," she said. "Look, there isn't a single
comment on this sheet that contradicts the idea that the Deepness was
mist."
"Not
contradicting a point and proving it are different things, Lady Vin."
She waved
indifferently. "I'm right, Sazed. I know I am."
"What about
this point, then?" Sazed asked, pointing to a line. "The
Hero implies that he can sense a sentience to the Deepness. The mist
isn't alive."
"Well, it does
swirl around someone using Allomancy."
"That isn't
the same thing, I think," Sazed said. "He says that the
Deepness was mad . . . destructively insane. Evil."
Vin paused. "There
is something, Sazed," she admitted.
He frowned.
She pointed at
another section of notes. "Do you recognize these paragraphs?"
It isn't a shadow, the words read.
This
dark thing that follows me, the thing that only I can see—it
isn't really a shadow. It is blackish and translucent, but it doesn't
have a shadowlike solid outline. It's insubstantial—wispy and
formless. Like it's made out of a dark fog.
Or
mist, perhaps.
"Yes, Lady
Vin," Sazed said. "The Hero saw a creature following him.
It attacked one of his companions, I think."
Vin looked in his
eyes. "I've seen it, Sazed."
He felt a chill.
"It's out
there," she said. "Every night, in the mists. Watching me.
I can feel it, with Allomancy. And, if I get close enough, I
can see it. As if formed from the mist itself. Insubstantial, yet
somehow still there."
Sazed sat quietly
for a moment, not certain what to think.
"You think me
mad," Vin accused.
"No, Lady
Vin," he said quietly. "I don't think any of us are in a
position to call such things madness, not considering what is
happening. Just . . . are you certain?"
She nodded firmly.
"But,"
Sazed said. "Even if this is true, it does not answer my
question. The logbook author saw that same creature, and he didn't
refer to it as the Deepness. It was not the Deepness, then. The
Deepness was something else—something dangerous, something he
could feel as evil."
"That's the
secret, then," Vin said. "We have to figure out why he
spoke of the mists that way. Then we'll know . . . "
"Know what,
Lady Vin?" Sazed asked.
Vin paused, then
looked away. She didn't answer, instead turning to a different topic.
"Sazed, the Hero never did what he was supposed to. Rashek
killed him. And, when Rashek took the power at the Well, he didn't
give it up like he was supposed to—he kept it for himself."
"True,"
Sazed said.
Vin paused again.
"And the mists have started killing people. They've started
coming during the day. It's . . . like things are repeating again. So
. . . maybe that means that the Hero of Ages will have to come
again."
She glanced back at
him, looking a bit . . . embarrassed? Ah . . . Sazed thought,
sensing her implication. She saw things in the mists. The previous
Hero had seen the same things. "I am not certain that is a valid
statement, Lady Vin."
She snorted. "Why
can't you just come out and say 'you're wrong,' like regular people?"
"I apologize,
Lady Vin. I have had much training as a servant, and we are taught to
be nonconfrontational. Nevertheless, I do not think that you are
wrong. However, I also think that, perhaps, you haven't fully
considered your position."
Vin shrugged.
"What makes
you think that the Hero of Ages will return?"
"I don't know.
Things that happen; things I feel. The mists are coming again, and
someone needs to stop them."
Sazed ran his
fingers across his translated section of the rubbing, looking over
its words.
"You don't
believe me," Vin said.
"It isn't
that, Lady Vin," Sazed said. "It's just that I am not prone
to rushing to decisions."
"But, you've
thought about the Hero of Ages, haven't you?" Vin said. "He
was part of your religion—the lost religion of Terris, the
thing you Keepers were founded to try and discover."
"That is
true," Sazed admitted. "However, we do not know much about
the prophecies that our ancestors used to find their Hero. Besides,
the reading I've been doing lately suggests that there was something
wrong with their interpretations. If the greatest theologians of
pre-Ascension Terris were unable to properly identify their Hero, how
are we supposed to do so?"
Vin sat quietly. "I
shouldn't have brought it up," she finally said.
"No, Lady Vin,
please don't think that. I apologize—your theories have great
merit. I simply have a scholar's mind, and must question and consider
information when I am given it. I am far too fond of arguing, I
think."
Vin looked up,
smiling slightly. "Another reason you never made a good Terris
steward?"
"Undoubtedly,"
he said with a sigh. "My attitude also tends to cause conflicts
with the others of my order."
"Like
Tindwyl?" Vin asked. "She didn't sound happy when she heard
that you'd told us about Feruchemy."
Sazed nodded. "For
a group dedicated to knowledge, the Keepers can be rather stingy with
information about their powers. When the Lord Ruler still lived—when
Keepers were hunted—the caution was warranted, I think. But,
now that we are free from that, my brethren and sisters seem to have
found the habit of secrecy a difficult one to break."
Vin nodded.
"Tindwyl doesn't seem to like you very much. She says that she
came because of your suggestion, but every time someone mentions you,
she seems to get . . . cold."
Sazed sighed. Did
Tindwyl dislike him? He thought, perhaps, that her inability to do so
was a large part of the problem. "She is simply disappointed in
me, Lady Vin. I'm not sure how much you know of my history, but I had
been working against the Lord Ruler for some ten years before Kelsier
recruited me. The other Keepers thought that I endangered my
copperminds, and the very order itself. They believed that the
Keepers should remain quiet—waiting for the day when the Lord
Ruler fell, but not seeking to make it happen."
"Seems a bit
cowardly to me," Vin said.
"Ah, but it
was a very prudent course. You see, Lady Vin, had I been captured,
there are many things I could have revealed. The names of other
Keepers, the location of our safe houses, the means by which we
managed to hide ourselves in Terris culture. My brethren worked for
many decades to make the Lord Ruler think that Feruchemy had finally
been exterminated. By revealing myself, I could have undone all of
that."
"That would
only have been bad had we failed," Vin said. "We didn't."
"We could
have."
"We didn't."
Sazed paused, then
smiled. Sometimes, in a world of debate, questions, and self-doubt,
Vin's simple bluntness was refreshing. "Regardless," he
continued, "Tindwyl is a member of the Synod—a group of
Keeper elders who guide our sect. I have been in rebellion against
the Synod a number of times during my past. And, by returning to
Luthadel, I am defying them once again. She has good reason to be
displeased with me."
"Well, I
think you're doing the right thing," Vin said. "We need
you."
"Thank you,
Lady Vin."
"I don't think
you have to listen to Tindwyl," she said. "She's the type
who acts like she knows more than she does."
"She is very
wise."
"She's hard on
Elend."
"Then she
probably does so because it is best for him," Sazed said. "Do
not judge her too harshly, child. If she seems off-putting, it is
only because she has lived a very hard life."
"Hard life?"
Vin asked, tucking her notes back into her pocket.
"Yes, Lady
Vin," Sazed said. "You see, Tindwyl spent most of her life
as a Terris mother."
Vin hesitated, hand
in pocket, looking surprised. "You mean . . . she was a
Breeder?"
Sazed nodded. The
Lord Ruler's breeding program included selecting a few, special
individuals to use for birthing new children—with the goal
being to breed Feruchemy out of the population.
"Tindwyl had,
at last count, birthed over twenty children," he said. "Each
with a different father. Tindwyl had her first child when she was
fourteen, and spent her entire life being taken repeatedly by strange
men until she became pregnant. And, because of the fertility drugs
the Breeding masters forced upon her, she often bore twins or
triplets."
"I . . . see,"
Vin said softly.
"You are not
the only one who knew a terrible childhood, Lady Vin. Tindwyl is
perhaps the strongest woman I know."
"How did she
bear it?" Vin asked quietly. "I think . . . I think I would
probably have just killed myself."
"She is a
Keeper," Sazed said. "She suffered the indignity because
she knew that she did a great service for her people. You see,
Feruchemy is hereditary. Tindwyl's position as a mother ensured
future generations of Feruchemists among our people. Ironically, she
is exactly the sort of person that the Breeding masters were supposed
to avoid letting reproduce."
"But, how did
such a thing happen?"
"The breeders
assumed they'd already cut Feruchemy out of the population,"
Sazed said. "They started looking to create other traits in the
Terris—docility, temperance. They bred us like fine horses, and
it was a great stroke when the Synod managed to get Tindwyl chosen
for their program.
"Of course,
Tindwyl has very little training in Feruchemy. She did, fortunately,
receive some of the copperminds that we Keepers carry. So, during her
many years locked away, she was able to study and read biographies.
It was only during the last decade—her childbearing years
through—that she was able to join and gain fellowship with the
other Keepers."
Sazed paused, then
shook his head. "By comparison, the rest of us have known a life
of freedom, I think."
"Great,"
Vin mumbled, standing and yawning. "Another reason for you to
feel guilty."
"You should
sleep, Lady Vin," Sazed noted.
"For a few
hours," Vin said, walking toward the door, leaving him alone
again with his studies.
In the end, my
pride may have doomed us all.





31
PHILEN FRANDEU WAS
NOT SKAA. He had never been skaa. Skaa made things or grew
things. Philen sold things. There was an enormous difference between
the two.
Oh, some people had
called him skaa. Even now, he could see that word in the eyes of some
of the other Assemblymen. They regarded Philen and his fellow
merchants with the same disdain that they gave the eight skaa workers
on the Assembly. Couldn't they see that the two groups were
completely different?
Philen shifted a
bit on the bench. Shouldn't the Assembly hall at least have
comfortable seating? They were waiting on just a few members; the
tall clock in the corner said that fifteen minutes still remained
until the meeting began. Oddly, one of those who had yet to arrive
was Venture himself. King Elend was usually early.
Not king
anymore, Philen thought with a smile. Just plain old Elend
Venture. It was a poor name—not as good as Philen's own. Of
course, he had been just "Lin" until a year and a half ago.
Philen Frandeu was what he had dubbed himself after the Collapse. It
delighted him to no end that the others had taken to calling him the
name without pause. But, why shouldn't he have a grand name? A lord's
name? Was Philen not as good as any of the "noblemen"
sitting aloofly in their places?
Oh, he was just as
good. Better, even. Yes, they had called him skaa—but during
those years, they had come to him out of need, and so their arrogant
sneers had lacked power. He'd seen their insecurity. They'd needed
him. A man they called skaa. But he'd also been a merchant. A
merchant who wasn't noble. Something that wasn't supposed to have
existed in the Lord Ruler's perfect little empire.
But, noblemen
merchants had to work with the obligators. And, where there had been
obligators, nothing illegal could occur. Hence Philen. He'd been . .
. an intermediary, of sorts. A man capable of arranging deals between
interested parties who, for various reasons, wanted to avoid the
watchful eyes of the Lord Ruler's obligators. Philen hadn't been part
of a thieving crew—no, that was far too dangerous. And far too
mundane.
He had been born
with an eye for finances and trades. Give him two rocks, and he'd
have a quarry by the end of the week. Give him a spoke, and he'd
change it to a fine horse-drawn carriage. Two bits of corn, and he'd
eventually have a massive shipment of grain sailing to the Farmost
Dominance markets. Actual noblemen had done the trades, of course,
but Philen had been behind it all. A vast empire of his own.
And still, they
couldn't see. He wore a suit as fine as theirs; now that he could
trade openly, he had become one of the wealthiest men in Luthadel.
Yet, the noblemen ignored him, just because he lacked a valid
pedigree.
Well, they would
see. After today's meeting . . . yes, they would see. Philen looked
out into the crowd, looking anxiously for the person he had hidden
there. Reassured, he looked toward the noblemen of the Assembly, who
sat chatting a short distance away. One of their last members—Lord
Ferson Penrod—had just arrived. The older man walked up onto
the Assembly's dais, passing by the members, greeting each in turn.
"Philen,"
Penrod said, noticing him. "A new suit, I see. The red vest
suits you."
"Lord Penrod!
Why, you're looking well. You got over the other night's ailment,
then?"
"Yes, it
passed quickly," the lord said, nodding a head topped with
silver hair. "Just a touch of stomach ills."
Pity, Philen
thought, smiling. "Well, we'd best be seated. I see that young
Venture isn't here, though . . . ."
"Yes,"
Penrod said, frowning. He'd been most difficult to convince to vote
against Venture; he had something of a fondness for the boy. He had
come around in the end. They all had.
Penrod moved on,
joining the other noblemen. The old fool probably thought he was
going to end up as king. Well, Philen had other plans for that
throne. It wasn't Philen's own posterior that would sit in it, of
course; he had no interest in running a country. Seemed like a
terrible way to make money. Selling things. That was a much better
way. More stable, less likely to lose one his head.
Oh, but Philen had
plans. He'd always had those. He had to keep himself from glancing at
the audience again.
Philen turned,
instead, to study the Assembly. They had all arrived except Venture.
Seven noblemen, eight merchants, and eight skaa workers: twenty-four
men, with Venture. The three-way division was supposed to give the
commoners the most power, since they ostensibly outnumbered the
noblemen. Even Venture hadn't understood that merchants weren't skaa.
Philen wrinkled his
nose. Even though the skaa Assemblymen usually cleaned up before
coming to the meetings, he could smell the stink of forges, mills,
and shops on them. Men who made things. Philen would have to be
certain they were put back in their place, once this was over. An
Assembly was an interesting idea, but it should be filled only with
those who deserved the station. Men like Philen.
Lord Philen,
he thought. Not long now.
Hopefully, Elend
would be late. Then, maybe they could avoid his speech. Philen could
imagine how it would go anyway.
Um . . . now,
see, this wasn't fair. I should be king. Here, let me read you a book
about why. Now, um, can you all please give some more money to the
skaa?
Philen smiled.
The man next to
him, Getrue, nudged him. "You think he's going to show up?"
he whispered.
"Probably not.
He must know that we don't want him. We kicked him out, didn't we?"
Getrue shrugged.
He'd gained weight since the Collapse—a lot of it. "I
don't know, Lin. I mean . . . we didn't mean. He was just . . . the
armies . . . We have to have a strong king, right? Someone who will
keep the city from falling?"
"Of course,"
Philen said. "And my name isn't Lin."
Getrue flushed.
"Sorry."
"We did the
right thing," Philen continued. "Venture is a weak man. A
fool."
"I wouldn't
say that," Getrue said. "He has good ideas . . . ."
Getrue glanced downward uncomfortably.
Philen snorted,
glancing at the clock. It was time, though he couldn't hear the
chimes over the crowd. The Assembly meetings had become busy since
Venture's fall. Benches fanned out before the stage, benches crowded
with people, mostly skaa. Philen wasn't sure why they were allowed to
attend. They couldn't vote or anything.
More Venture
foolishness, he thought, shaking his head. At the very back of
the room—behind the crowd, opposite the stage—sat two
large, broad doors letting in the red sunlight. Philen nodded toward
some men, and they pushed the doors shut. The crowds hushed.
Philen stood to
address the Assembly. "Well, since—"
The Assembly hall
doors burst back open. A man in white stood with a small crowd of
people, backlit by red sunlight. Elend Venture. Philen cocked his
head, frowning.
The former king
strode forward, white cape fluttering behind him. His Mistborn was at
his side, as usual, but she was wearing a dress. From the few times
Philen had spoken with her, he would have expected her to look
awkward in a noblewoman's gown. And yet, she seemed to wear it well,
walking gracefully. She actually looked rather fetching.
At least, until
Philen met her eyes. She did not have a warm look for the Assembly
members, and Philen glanced away. Venture had brought all of his
Allomancers with him—the former thugs of the Survivor's crew.
Elend apparently wanted to remind everyone who his friends were.
Powerful men. Frightening men.
Men who killed
gods.
And Elend had not
one, but two Terrismen with him. One was only a woman—Philen
had never seen a Terriswoman before—but still, it was
impressive. Everyone had heard how the stewards had left their
masters after the Collapse; they refused to work as servants anymore.
Where had Venture found not one, but two of the colorful-robed
stewards to serve him?
The crowd sat
quietly, watching Venture. Some seemed uncomfortable. How were they
to treat this man? Others seemed . . . awed? Was that right? Who
would be awed by Elend Venture—even if the Elend Venture in
question was clean-shaven, had styled hair, wore new clothing and . .
. ? Philen frowned. Was that a dueling cane the king was wearing? And
a wolfhound at his side?
He's not king
anymore! Philen reminded himself again.
Venture strode up
onto the Assembly stage. He turned, waving for his people—all
eight of them—to sit with the guards. Venture then turned and
glanced at Philen. "Philen, did you want to say something?"
Philen realized he
was still standing. "I . . . was just—"
"Are you
Assembly chancellor?" Elend asked.
Philen paused.
"Chancellor?"
"The king
presides at Assembly meetings," Elend said. "We now have no
king—and so, by law, the Assembly should have elected a
chancellor to call speakers, adjudicate time allotments, and break
tie votes." He paused, eyeing Philen. "Someone needs to
lead. Otherwise there is chaos."
Despite himself,
Philen grew nervous. Did Venture know that Philen had organized the
vote against him? No, no he didn't, he couldn't. He was looking at
each of the Assembly members in turn, meeting their eyes. There was
none of the jovial, dismissible boy that had attended these meetings
before. Standing in the militaristic suit, firm instead of hesitant .
. . he almost seemed like a different person.
You found a
coach, it appears, Philen thought. A little too late. Just
wait . . . .
Philen sat down.
"Actually, we didn't get a chance to choose a chancellor,"
he said. "We were just getting to that."
Elend nodded, a
dozen different instructions rattling in his head. Keep eye contact.
Use subtle, but firm, expressions. Never appear hurried, but don't
seem hesitant. Sit down without wiggling, don't shuffle, use a
straight posture, don't form your hands into fists when you're
nervous . . . .
He shot a quick
glance at Tindwyl. She gave him a nod.
Get back to it,
El, he told himself. Let them sense the differences in you.
He walked over to
take his seat, nodding to the other seven noblemen on the Assembly.
"Very well," he said, taking the lead. "Then, might I
nominate a chancellor?"
"Yourself?"
asked Dridel, one of the noblemen; his sneer seemed permanent, as far
as Elend could tell. It was a passably appropriate expression for one
with such a sharp face and dark hair.
"No,"
Elend said. "I'm hardly an unbiased party in today's
proceedings. Therefore, I nominate Lord Penrod. He's as honorable a
man as we're likely to find, and I believe he can be trusted to
mediate our discussions."
The group was quiet
for a moment.
"That seems
logical," Hettel, a forge worker, finally said.
"All in
favor?" Elend said, raising his hand. He got a good eighteen
hands—all of the skaa, most of the nobility, only one of the
merchants. It was a majority, however.
Elend turned to
Lord Penrod. "I believe that means that you are in charge,
Ferson."
The stately man
nodded appreciatively, then rose to formally open the meeting,
something Elend had once done. Penrod's mannerisms were polished, his
posture strong as he stood in his well-cut suit. Elend couldn't help
but feel a little jealous, watching Penrod act so naturally in the
things that Elend was struggling to learn.
Maybe he would
make a better king than I, Elend thought. Perhaps . . .
No, he
thought firmly. I have to be confident. Penrod is a decent man and
an impeccable noble, but those things do not make a leader. He hasn't
read what I've read, and doesn't understand legislative theory as I
do. He's a good man, but he's still a product of his society—he
doesn't consider skaa animals, but he'll never be able to think of
them as equals.
Penrod finished the
introductions, then turned to Elend. "Lord Venture, you called
this meeting. I believe that the law grants you first opportunity to
address the Assembly."
Elend nodded
thankfully, rising.
"Will twenty
minutes be enough time?" Penrod asked.
"It should
be," Elend said, passing Penrod as they traded places. Elend
stood up at the lectern. To his right, the floor of the hall was
packed with shuffling, coughing, whispering people. There was a
tension to the room—this was the first time Elend had
confronted the group that had betrayed him.
"As many of
you know," Elend said to the twenty-three Assembly members, "I
recently returned from a meeting with Straff Venture—the
warlord who is, unfortunately, my father. I would like to give a
report of this encounter. Realize that because this is an open
meeting, I will adjust my report to avoid mentioning sensitive
matters of national security."
He paused just
slightly, and saw the looks of confusion he had expected. Finally,
Philen the merchant cleared his throat.
"Yes, Philen?"
Elend asked.
"This is all
well and good, Elend," Philen said. "But aren't you going
to address the matter that brought us here?"
"The reason we
meet together, Philen," Elend said, "is so that we can
discuss how to keep Luthadel safe and prosperous. I think the people
are most worried about the armies—and we should, primarily,
seek to address their concerns. Matters of leadership in the Assembly
can wait."
"I . . . see,"
Philen said, obviously confused.
"The time is
yours, Lord Venture," Penrod said. "Proceed as you wish."
"Thank you,
Chancellor," Elend said. "I wish to make it very clear that
my father is not going to attack this city. I can understand
why people would be concerned, particularly because of last week's
preliminary assault on our walls. That, however, was simply a
test—Straff fears attacking too much to commit all of his
resources.
"During our
meeting, Straff told me that he had made an alliance with Cett.
However, I believe this to have been a bluff—if, unfortunately,
a bluff with teeth. I suspect that he was, indeed, planning to risk
attacking us, despite Cett's presence. That attack has been halted."
"Why?"
asked one of the worker representatives. "Because you're his
son?"
"No,
actually," Elend said. "Straff is not one to let familial
relationships hamper his determination." Elend paused, glancing
at Vin. He was beginning to realize that she didn't like being the
one who held the knife at Straff's throat, but she had given him
permission to speak of her in his speech.
Still . . .
She said it was
all right, he told himself. I'm not choosing duty over her!
"Come now,
Elend," Philen said. "Stop with the theatrics. What did you
promise Straff to keep his armies out of the city?"
"I threatened
him," Elend said. "My fellow Assemblymen, when facing down
my father in parlay, I realized that we—as a group—have
generally ignored one of our greatest resources. We think of
ourselves as an honorable body, created by the mandate of the people.
However, we are not here because of anything we ourselves did. There
is only one reason we have the positions we do—and that reason
is the Survivor of Hathsin."
Elend looked the
members of the Assembly in the eyes as he continued. "I have, at
times, felt as I suspect that many of you do. The Survivor is a
legend already, one we cannot hope to emulate. He has power over this
people—a power stronger than our own, even though he is dead.
We're jealous. Insecure, even. These are natural, human feelings.
Leaders feel them just as acutely as other people—perhaps even
more so.
"Gentlemen, we
cannot afford to continue thinking like this. The Survivor's legacy
doesn't belong to one group, or even to this city alone. He is our
progenitor—the father of everyone who is free in this land.
Whether or not you accept his religious authority, you must admit
that without his bravery and sacrifice, we would not now enjoy our
current freedom."
"What does
this have to do with Straff?" Philen snapped.
"Everything,"
Elend said. "For, though the Survivor is gone, his legacy
remains. Specifically, in the form of his apprentice." Elend
nodded toward Vin. "She is the most powerful Mistborn
alive—something Straff now knows for himself. Gentlemen, I know
my father's temperament. He will not attack this city while he fears
retribution from a source he cannot stop. He now realizes that if he
attacks, he will incur the wrath of the Survivor's heir—a wrath
not even the Lord Ruler himself could withstand."
Elend fell silent,
listening to the whispered conversations move through the crowd. News
of what he'd just said would reach the populace, and bring them
strength. Perhaps, even, news would reach Straff's army through the
spies Elend knew must be in the audience. He'd noticed his father's
Allomancer sitting in the crowd, the one named Zane.
And when news
reached Straff's army, the men there might think twice about obeying
any orders to attack. Who would want to face the very force that had
destroyed the Lord Ruler? It was a weak hope—the men of
Straff's army probably didn't believe all of the stories out of
Luthadel—but every little bit of weakened morale would help.
It also wouldn't
hurt for Elend to associate himself a little more strongly with the
Survivor. He was just going to have to get over his insecurity;
Kelsier had been a great man, but he was gone. Elend would just have
to do his best to see that the Survivor's legacy lived on.
For that was what
would be best for his people.
Vin sat with a
twisted stomach, listening to Elend's speech.
"You okay with
this?" Ham whispered, leaning over to her as Elend gave a more
detailed account of his visit with Straff.
Vin shrugged.
"Whatever helps the kingdom."
"You were
never comfortable with the way that Kell set himself up with the
skaa—none of us were."
"It's what
Elend needs," Vin said.
Tindwyl, who sat
just before them, turned and gave her a flat look. Vin expected some
recrimination for whispering during the Assembly proceedings, but
apparently the Terriswoman had a different kind of castigation in
mind.
"The king—"
She still referred to Elend that way. "—needs this link
with the Survivor. Elend has very little of his own authority to rely
upon, and Kelsier is currently the most well loved, most celebrated
man in the Central Dominance. By implying that the government was
founded by the Survivor, the king will make the people think twice
about meddling with it."
Ham nodded
thoughtfully. Vin glanced downward, however. What's the problem?
Just earlier, I was beginning to wonder if I were the Hero of Ages,
and now I'm worried about the notoriety Elend is giving me?
She sat
uncomfortably, burning bronze, feeling the pulsing from far away. It
was growing even louder . . . .
Stop it! she
told herself. Sazed doesn't think the Hero would return, and he
knows the histories better than anyone. It was foolish, anyway. I
need to focus on what's happening here.
After all, Zane was
in the audience.
Vin sought out his
face near the back of the room, a light burn of tin—not enough
to blind her—letting her study his features. He wasn't looking
at her, but watching the Assembly. Was he working at Straff's
command, or was this visit his own? Straff and Cett both undoubtedly
had spies in the audience—and, of course, Ham had guards mixed
with the people as well. Zane unnerved her, however. Why didn't he
turn toward her? Wasn't—
Zane met her eyes.
He smiled slightly, then turned back to his study of Elend.
Vin felt a shiver
despite herself. So, did this mean he wasn't avoiding her? Focus!
She told herself. You need to pay attention to what Elend is
saying.
He was almost done,
however. He wrapped up his speech with a few comments on how he
thought they could keep Straff off-balance. Again, he couldn't be too
detailed—not without giving away secrets. He glanced at the
large clock in the corner; done three minutes early, he moved to
leave the lectern.
Lord Penrod cleared
his throat. "Elend, aren't you forgetting something?"
Elend hesitated,
then looked back at the Assembly. "What is it that you all want
me to say?"
"Don't you
have a reaction?" one of the skaa workers said. "About . .
. what happened at the last meeting?"
"You received
my missive," Elend said. "You know how I feel about the
matter. However, this public forum is not a place for accusations or
denunciations. The Assembly is too noble a body for that kind of
thing. I wish that a time of danger were not when the Assembly had
chosen to voice its concerns, but we cannot alter what has happened."
He moved to sit
again.
"That's it?"
asked one of the skaa. "You're not even going to argue for
yourself, try and persuade us to reinstate you?"
Elend paused again.
"No," he said. "No, I don't think that I will. You
have made your opinions known to me, and I am disappointed. However,
you are the representatives chosen by the people. I believe in the
power that you have been given.
"If you have
questions, or challenges, I will be happy to defend myself. However,
I am not going to stand and preach my virtues. You all know me. You
know what I can do, and what I intend to do, for this city and the
surrounding populace. Let that stand as my argument."
He returned to his
seat. Vin could see hints of a frown on Tindwyl's face. Elend hadn't
given the speech that she and he had prepared, a speech giving the
very arguments the Assembly was obviously expecting.
Why the change?
Vin wondered. Tindwyl obviously didn't think it was a good idea. And
yet, oddly, Vin found herself trusting Elend's instincts more than
she did Tindwyl's.
"Well,"
Lord Penrod said, approaching the lectern again. "Thank you for
that report, Lord Venture. I'm not certain if we have other items of
business . . . ."
"Lord Penrod?"
Elend asked.
"Yes?"
"Perhaps you
should hold the nominations?"
Lord Penrod
frowned.
"The
nominations for king, Penrod," Philen snapped.
Vin paused, eyeing
the merchant. He certainly seems up on things, she noted.
"Yes,"
Elend said, eyeing Philen as well. "In order for the Assembly to
choose a new king, nominations must be held at least three days
before the actual voting. I suggest we hold the nominations now, so
that we can hold the vote as soon as possible. The city suffers each
day it is without a leader."
Elend paused, then
smiled. "Unless, of course, you intend to let the month lapse
without choosing a new king . . . ."
Good to confirm
that he still wants the crown, Vin thought.
"Thank you,
Lord Venture," Penrod said. "We'll do that now, then. . . .
And, how exactly do we proceed?"
"Each member
of the Assembly may make one nomination, if he wishes," Elend
said. "So that we don't become overburdened with options, I
would recommend that we all exercise restraint—only choose
someone that you honestly and sincerely think would make the finest
king. If you have a nomination to make, you may stand and announce it
to the rest of the group."
Penrod nodded,
returning to his seat. Almost as soon as he sat, however, one of the
skaa stood. "I nominate Lord Penrod."
Elend had to
expect that, Vin thought. After nominating Penrod to be
chancellor. Why give such authority to the man that he knew would be
his greatest contender for the throne?
The answer was
simple. Because Elend knew that Lord Penrod was the best choice for
chancellor. Sometimes, he's a little too honorable, Vin
thought, not for the first time. She turned to study the skaa
Assemblyman who had nominated Penrod. Why were the skaa so quick to
unify behind a nobleman?
She suspected that
it was still too soon. The skaa were accustomed to being led by
noblemen, and even with their freedom, they were traditional
beings—more traditional, even, than the noblemen. A lord like
Penrod—calm, commanding—seemed inherently better suited
to the title of king than a skaa.
They'll have to
get over that, eventually, Vin thought. At least, they will if
they're ever going to be the people that Elend wants them to be.
The room remained
quiet, no other nominations being made. A few people coughed in the
audience, even the whispers now dead. Finally, Lord Penrod himself
stood.
"I nominate
Elend Venture," he said.
"Ah . . . "
someone whispered behind her.
Vin turned,
glancing at Breeze. "What?" she whispered.
"Brilliant,"
Breeze said. "Don't you see? Penrod is an honorable man. Or, at
least, as honorable as noblemen get—which means that he insists
on being seen as honorable. Elend nominated Penrod for
chancellor . . . ."
Hoping, in turn,
that Penrod would feel obligated to nominate Elend for king, Vin
realized. She glanced at Elend, noting a slight smile on his lips.
Had he really crafted the exchange? It seemed a move subtle enough
for Breeze himself.
Breeze shook his
head appreciatively. "Not only did Elend not have to nominate
himself—which would have made him look desperate—but now
everyone on the Assembly thinks that the man they respect, the man
they would probably choose as king, would rather have Elend hold the
title. Brilliant."
Penrod sat, and the
room remained quiet. Vin suspected that he also had made the
nomination so that he wouldn't go uncontested to the throne. The
entire Assembly probably thought that Elend deserved a chance to
reclaim his place; Penrod was just the one who was honorable enough
to voice the feeling.
But, what about
the merchants? Vin thought. They've got to have their own
plan. Elend thought that it was probably Philen who had organized
the vote against him. They'd want to put one of their own on the
throne, one who could open the city gates to whichever of the kings
was manipulating them—or whichever one paid the best.
She studied the
group of eight men, in their suits that seemed—somehow—even
more fine than those of the noblemen. They all seemed to be waiting
on the whims of a single man. What was Philen planning?
One of the
merchants moved as if to stand, but Philen shot him a harsh glance.
The merchant did not rise. Philen sat quietly, a nobleman's dueling
cane across his lap. Finally, when most of the room had noticed the
merchant's focus on him, he slowly rose to his feet.
"I have a
nomination of my own," he said.
There was a snort
from the skaa section. "Now who's being melodramatic, Philen?"
one of the Assemblymen there said. "Just go ahead and do
it—nominate yourself."
Philen raised an
eyebrow. "Actually, I'm not going to nominate myself."
Vin frowned, and
she saw confusion in Elend's eyes.
"Though I
appreciate the sentiment," Philen continued, "I am but a
simple merchant. No, I think that the title of king should go to
someone whose skills are a little more specialized. Tell me, Lord
Venture, must our nominations be for people on the Assembly?"
"No,"
Elend said. "The king doesn't have to be an Assemblyman—I
accepted this position after the fact. The king's primary duty is
that of creating, then enforcing, the law. The Assembly is only an
advisory council with some measure of counterbalancing power. The
king himself can be anyone—actually, the title was intended to
be hereditary. I didn't expect . . . certain clauses to be invoked
quite so quickly."
"Ah, yes,"
Philen said. "Well, then. I think the title should go to someone
who has a little practice with it. Someone who has shown skill with
leadership. Therefore, I nominate Lord Ashweather Cett to be our
king!"
What? Vin
thought with shock as Philen turned, gesturing toward the audience. A
man sitting there removed his skaa cloak, pulling down the hood,
revealing a suit and a face with a bristling beard.
"Oh dear . . .
" Breeze said.
"It's actually
him?" Vin asked incredulously as the whispers began in the
audience.
Breeze nodded. "Oh,
that's him. Lord Cett himself." He paused, then eyed her. "I
think we might be in trouble."
I had never
received much attention from my brethren; they thought that my work
and my interests were unsuitable to a Worldbringer. The couldn't see
how my work, studying nature instead of religion, benefited the
people of the fourteen lands.





32
VIN SAT QUIETLY,
TENSELY, SCANNING the crowd. Cett wouldn't have come alone,
she thought.
And then she saw
them, now that she knew what she was looking for. Soldiers in the
crowd, dressed like skaa, forming a small protective buffer around
Cett's seat. The king did not rise, though a young man at his side
did.
Maybe thirty
guards, Vin thought. He may not be foolish enough to come
alone . . . but entering the very city you're besieging? It was a
bold move—one that bordered on stupidity. Of course, many had
said the same about Elend's visit to Straff's army.
But Cett wasn't in
the same position as Elend. He wasn't desperate, wasn't in danger of
losing everything. Except . . . he had a smaller army than Straff,
and the koloss were coming. And if Straff did secure the supposed
atium supply, Cett's days as leader in the West would certainly be
numbered. Coming into Luthadel might not have been an act of
desperation, but it also wasn't the act of a man who held the upper
hand. Cett was gambling.
And he seemed to be
enjoying it.
Cett smiled as the
room waited in silence, Assemblymen and audience alike too shocked to
speak. Finally, Cett waved to a few of his disguised soldiers, and
the men picked up Cett's chair and carried it to the stage.
Assemblymen whispered and commented, turning to aides or companions,
seeking confirmation of Cett's identity. Most of the noblemen sat
quietly—which should have been enough of a confirmation, in
Vin's mind.
"He's not what
I expected," Vin whispered to Breeze as the soldiers climbed up
on the dais.
"Nobody told
you he was crippled?" Breeze asked.
"Not just
that," Vin said. "He's not wearing a suit." He had on
a pair of trousers and a shirt, but instead of a nobleman's suit
coat, he was wearing a worn black jacket. "Plus, that beard. He
couldn't have grown a beast like that in one year—he must have
had it before the Collapse."
"You only knew
noblemen in Luthadel, Vin," Ham said. "The Final Empire was
a big place, with a lot of different societies. Not everybody dresses
like they do here."
Breeze nodded.
"Cett was the most powerful nobleman in his area, so he needn't
worry about tradition and propriety. He did what he wished, and the
local nobility pandered. There were a hundred different courts with a
hundred different little 'Lord Rulers' in the empire, each region
having its own political dynamic."
Vin turned back to
the stage front. Cett sat in his chair, having yet to speak. Finally,
Lord Penrod stood. "This is most unexpected, Lord Cett."
"Good!"
Cett said. "That was, after all, the point!"
"Do you wish
to address the Assembly?"
"I thought I
already was."
Penrod cleared his
throat, and Vin's tin-enhanced ears heard a disparaging mutter from
the noblemen's section regarding "Western noblemen."
"You have ten
minutes, Lord Cett," Penrod said, sitting.
"Good,"
Cett said. "Because—unlike the boy over there—I
intend to tell you exactly why you should make me king."
"And that is?"
one of the merchant Assemblymen asked.
"Because I've
got an army on your damn doorstep!" Cett said with a laugh.
The Assembly looked
taken aback.
"A threat,
Cett?" Elend asked calmly.
"No, Venture,"
Cett replied. "Just honesty—something you Central noblemen
seem to avoid at all cost. A threat is only a promise turned around.
What was it you told these people? That your mistress had her knife
at Straff's throat? So, were you implying that if you weren't
elected, you'd have your Mistborn withdraw, and let the city be
destroyed?"
Elend flushed. "Of
course not."
"Of course
not," Cett repeated. He had a loud voice—unapologetic,
forceful. "Well, I don't pretend, and I don't hide. My army is
here, and my intention is to take this city. However, I'd much rather
that you just give it to me."
"You, sir, are
a tyrant," Penrod said flatly.
"So?"
Cett asked. "I'm a tyrant with forty thousand soldiers. That's
twice what you've got guarding these walls."
"What's to
stop us from simply taking you hostage?" asked one of the other
noblemen. "You seem to have delivered yourself to us quite
neatly."
Cett bellowed a
laugh. "If I don't return to my camp this evening, my army has
orders to attack and raze the city immediately—no matter what!
They'll probably get destroyed by Venture afterward—but it
won't matter to me, or to you, at that point! We'll all be dead."
The room fell
silent.
"See,
Venture?" Cett asked. "Threats work wonderfully."
"You honestly
expect us to make you our king?" Elend asked.
"Actually, I
do," Cett said. "Look, with your twenty thousand added to
my forty, we could easily hold these walls against Straff—we
could even stop that army of koloss."
Whispers began
immediately, and Cett raised a bushy eyebrow, turning to Elend. "You
didn't tell them about the koloss, did you?"
Elend didn't
respond.
"Well, they'll
know soon enough," Cett said. "Regardless, I don't see that
you have any other option but to elect me."
"You're not an
honorable man," Elend said simply. "The people expect more
from their leaders."
"I'm not an
honorable man?" Cett asked with amusement. "And you are?
Let me ask you a direct question, Venture. During the proceedings of
this meeting, have any of your Allomancers over there been Soothing
members of the Assembly?"
Elend paused. His
eyes glanced to the side, finding Breeze. Vin closed her eyes. No,
Elend, don't—
"Yes, they
have," Elend admitted.
Vin heard Tindwyl
groan quietly.
"And,"
Cett continued, "can you honestly say that you've never doubted
yourself? Never wondered if you were a good king?"
"I think every
leader wonders these things," Elend said.
"Well, I
haven't," Cett said. "I've always known I was meant to be
in charge—and I've always done the best job of making certain
that I stayed in power. I know how to make myself strong, and that
means I know how to make those who associate with me strong as well.
"Here's the
deal. You give me the crown, and I'll take charge here. You all get
to keep your titles—and those of the Assembly who don't have
titles will get them. In addition, you'll get to keep your
heads—which is a far better deal than Straff would offer, I
assure you.
"The people
get to keep working, and I'll make certain that they're fed this
winter. Everything goes back to normal, the way it was before this
insanity began a year back. The skaa work, the nobility
administrates."
"You think
they'd go back to that?" Elend asked. "After all we fought
for, you think I will simply let you force the people back into
slavery?"
Cett smiled beneath
his large beard. "I wasn't under the impression that the
decision was yours, Elend Venture."
Elend fell silent.
"I want to
meet with each of you," Cett said to the Assemblymen. "If
you'll allow, I wish to move into Luthadel with some of my men. Say,
a force of five thousand—enough to make me feel safe, but not
to be of any real danger to you. I'll take up residence in one of the
abandoned keeps, and wait until your decision next week. During that
time, I'll meet with each of you in turn and explain the . . .
benefits that would come from choosing me as your king."
"Bribes,"
Elend spat.
"Of course,"
Cett said. "Bribes for all of the people of this city—the
foremost bribe being that of peace! You're so fond of name-calling,
Venture. 'Slaves,' 'threats,' 'honorable.' 'Bribe' is just a word.
Looked at another way, a bribe is just a promise, turned on its
head." Cett smiled.
The group of
Assemblymen was silent. "Shall we vote, then, on whether to let
him enter the city?" Penrod asked.
"Five thousand
is way too many," one of the skaa Assemblymen said.
"Agreed,"
Elend said. "There's no way we can let that many foreign troops
into Luthadel."
"I don't like
it at all," another said.
"What?"
said Philen. "A monarch inside our city will be less dangerous
than one outside, wouldn't you say? And besides, Cett has promised us
all titles."
This gave the group
something to think about.
"Why not just
give me the crown now?" Cett said. "Open your gates to my
army."
"You can't,"
Elend said immediately. "Not until there is a king—or
unless you can get a unanimous vote right now."
Vin smiled.
Unanimous wouldn't happen in that case as long as Elend was on the
Assembly.
"Bah,"
Cett said, but he obviously was smooth enough not to insult the
legislative body further. "Let me take up residence in the city,
then."
Penrod nodded. "All
in favor of allowing Lord Cett to take up residence inside with . . .
say . . . a thousand troops?"
A full nineteen of
the Assemblymen raised their hands. Elend was not one of them.
"It is done,
then," Penrod said. "We adjourn for two weeks."
This can't be
happening, Elend thought. I thought maybe Penrod would provide
a challenge, Philen a lesser one. But . . . one of the very tyrants
who is threatening the city? How could they? How could they even
consider his suggestion?
Elend stood,
catching Penrod's arm as he turned to walk off the dais. "Ferson,"
Elend said quietly, "this is insanity."
"We have to
consider the option, Elend."
"Consider
selling out the people of this city to a tyrant?"
Penrod's face grew
cold, and he shook Elend's arm free. "Listen, lad," he said
quietly. "You are a good man, but you've always been an
idealist. You've spent time in books and philosophy—I've spent
my life fighting politics with the members of the court. You know
theories; I know people."
He turned, nodding
to the audience. "Look at them, lad. They're terrified.
What good do your dreams do them when they're starving? You talk of
freedom and justice when two armies are preparing to slaughter their
families."
Penrod turned back
to Elend, staring him in the eyes. "The Lord Ruler's system
wasn't perfect, but it kept these people safe. We don't even have
that anymore. Your ideals can't face down armies. Cett might be a
tyrant, but given the choice between him and Straff, I'd have to
choose Cett. We'd probably have given him the city weeks ago, if you
hadn't stopped us."
Penrod nodded to
Elend, then turned and joined a few of the noblemen who were leaving.
Elend stood quietly for a moment.
We have seen a
curious phenomenon associated with rebel groups that break off of the
Final Empire and attempt to seek autonomy, he thought, recalling
a passage from Ytves's book Studies in Revolution. In almost all
cases, the Lord Ruler didn't need to send his armies to reconquer the
rebels. By the time his agents arrived, the groups had overthrown
themselves.
It seems that
the rebels found the chaos of transition more difficult to accept
than the tyranny they had known before. They joyfully welcomed back
authority—even oppressive authority—for it was less
painful for them than uncertainty.
Vin and the others
joined him on the stage, and he put his arm around her shoulders,
standing quietly as he watched people trail from the building. Cett
sat surrounded by a small group of Assemblymen, arranging meetings
with them.
"Well,"
Vin said quietly. "We know he's Mistborn."
Elend turned toward
her. "You sensed Allomancy from him?"
Vin shook her head.
"No."
"Then, how do
you know?" Elend asked.
"Well, look at
him," Vin said with a wave of her hand. "He acts like he
can't walk—that has to be covering up something. What
would be more innocent than a cripple? Can you think of a better way
to hide the fact that you're a Mistborn?"
"Vin, my
dear," Breeze said, "Cett has been crippled since
childhood, when a disease rendered his legs useless. He's not
Mistborn."
Vin raised an
eyebrow. "That has to be one of the best cover stories I've ever
heard."
Breeze rolled his
eyes, but Elend just smiled.
"What now,
Elend?" Ham asked. "We obviously can't deal with things the
same way now that Cett has entered the city."
Elend nodded. "We
have to plan. Let's . . . " He trailed off as a young man left
Cett's group, walking toward Elend. It was the same man who had been
sitting next to Cett.
"Cett's son,"
Breeze whispered. "Gneorndin."
"Lord
Venture," Gneorndin said, bowing slightly. He was, perhaps,
about Spook's age. "My father wishes to know when you would like
to meet with him."
Elend raised an
eyebrow. "I have no intention of joining the line of Assemblymen
waiting upon Cett's bribes, lad. Tell your father that he and I have
nothing to discuss."
"You don't?"
Gneorndin asked. "And what about my sister? The one you
kidnapped?"
Elend frowned. "You
know that isn't true."
"My father
would still like to discuss the event," Gneorndin said, shooting
a hostile glance at Breeze. "Besides, he thinks that a
conversation between you two might be in the city's best interests.
You met with Straff in his camp—don't tell me that you aren't
willing to do the same for Cett inside your own city?"
Elend paused.
Forget your biases, he told himself. You need to talk to
this man, if only for the information the meeting might provide.
"All right,"
Elend said. "I'll meet with him."
"Dinner, in
one week?" Gneorndin asked.
Elend nodded
curtly.
As the one who
found Alendi, however, I became someone important. Foremost among the
Worldbringers.





33
VIN LAY ON HER
STOMACH, arms folded, head resting on them as she studied a sheet of
paper on the floor in front of her. Considering the last few days of
chaos, it was surprising to her that she found returning to her
studies to be a relief.
A small one,
however, for her studies held their own problems. The Deepness
has returned, she thought. Even if the mists only kill
infrequently, they've begun to turn hostile again. That means the
Hero of Ages needs to come again too, doesn't it?
Did she honestly
think that might be her? It sounded ridiculous, when she considered
it. Yet, she heard the thumping in her head, saw the spirit in the
mists . . . .
And what of that
night, over a year gone, when she'd confronted the Lord Ruler? That
night when somehow, she'd drawn the mists into herself, burning them
as if they were metal?
That's not
enough, she told herself. One freak event—one I've never
been able to replicate—doesn't mean I'm some mythological
savior. She didn't even really know most of the prophecies about
the Hero. The logbook mentioned that he was supposed to come from
humble origins—but that pretty much described every skaa in the
Final Empire. He was supposed to have hidden royal bloodlines, but
that made every half-breed in the city a candidate. In fact, she'd be
willing to bet that most skaa had one or another hidden nobleman
progenitor.
She sighed, shaking
her head.
"Mistress?"
OreSeur asked, turning. He stood on a chair, his forepaws up against
the window as he looked out at the city.
"Prophecies,
legends, foretellings," Vin said, slapping her hand down on her
sheet of notes. "What's the point? Why did the Terris even
believe in these things? Shouldn't a religion teach something
practical?"
OreSeur settled
down on his haunches upon the chair. "What would be more
practical than gaining knowledge of the future?"
"If these
actually said something useful, I'd agree. But even the logbook
acknowledges that the Terris prophecies could be understood many
different ways. What good are promises that could be interpreted so
liberally?"
"Do not
dismiss someone's beliefs because you do not understand them,
Mistress."
Vin snorted. "You
sound like Sazed. A part of me is tempted to think that all these
prophecies and legends were devised by priests who wanted to make a
living."
"Only a part
of you?" OreSeur asked, sounding amused.
Vin paused, then
nodded. "The part that grew up on the streets, the part that
always expects a scam." That part didn't want to acknowledge the
other things she felt.
The thumpings were
getting stronger and stronger.
"Prophecies do
not have to be a scam, Mistress," OreSeur said. "Or even,
really, a promise for the future. They can simply be an expression of
hope."
"What do you
know of such things?" Vin said dismissively, setting aside her
sheet.
There was a moment
of silence. "Nothing, of course, Mistress," OreSeur
eventually said.
Vin turned toward
the dog. "I'm sorry, OreSeur. I didn't mean . . . Well, I've
just been feeling distracted lately."
Thump. Thump.
Thump . . . .
"You need not
apologize to me, Mistress," OreSeur said. "I am only
kandra."
"Still a
person," Vin said. "If one with dog breath."
OreSeur smiled.
"You chose these bones for me, Mistress. You must deal with the
consequences."
"The bones
might have something to do with it," Vin said, rising. "But
I don't think that carrion you eat is helping. Honestly, we have to
get you some mint leaves to chew."
OreSeur raised a
canine eyebrow. "And you don't think a dog with sweet breath
would attract attention?"
"Only from
anyone you happen to kiss in the near future," Vin said,
returning her stacks of paper to her desk.
OreSeur chuckled
softly in his canine way, turning back to study the city.
"Is the
procession finished yet?" Vin asked.
"Yes,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "It is difficult to see, even from
a height. But, it does look like Lord Cett has finished moving in. He
certainly did bring a lot of carts."
"He's
Allrianne's father," Vin said. "Despite how much that girl
complains about accommodations in the army, I'd bet that Cett likes
to travel in comfort."
OreSeur nodded. Vin
turned, leaning against the desk, watching him and thinking of what
he'd said earlier. Expression of hope . . . .
"The kandra
have a religion, don't they?" Vin guessed.
OreSeur turned
sharply. That was enough of a confirmation.
"Do the
Keepers know of it?" Vin asked.
OreSeur stood on
his hind legs, paws against the windowsill. "I should not have
spoken."
"You needn't
be afraid," Vin said. "I won't give away your secret. But,
I don't see why it has to be secret anymore."
"It is a
kandra thing, Mistress," OreSeur said. "It wouldn't be of
any interest to anyone else."
"Of course it
would," Vin said. "Don't you see, OreSeur? The Keepers
believe that the last independent religion was destroyed by the Lord
Ruler centuries ago. If the kandra managed to keep one, that suggests
that the Lord Ruler's theological control of the Final Empire wasn't
absolute. That has to mean something."
OreSeur paused,
cocking his head, as if he hadn't considered such things.
His theological
control wasn't absolute? Vin thought, a bit surprised at the
words. Lord Ruler—I'm starting to sound like Sazed and
Elend. I've been studying too much lately.
"Regardless,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "I'd rather you didn't mention
this to your Keeper friends. They would probably begin asking
discomforting questions."
"They're like
that," Vin said with a nod. "What is it your people have
prophecies about, anyway?"
"I don't think
you want to know, Mistress."
Vin smiled. "They
talk about overthrowing us, don't they?"
OreSeur sat down,
and she could almost see a flush on his canine face. "My . . .
people have dealt with the Contract for a great long time, Mistress.
I know it is difficult for you to understand why we would live under
this burden, but we find it necessary. Yet, we do dream of a day when
it may not be."
"When all the
humans are subject to you?" Vin asked.
OreSeur looked
away. "When they're all dead, actually."
"Wow."
"The
prophecies are not literal, Mistress," OreSeur said. "They're
metaphors—expressions of hope. Or, at least, that is how I have
always seen them. Perhaps your Terris prophecies are the same?
Expressions of a belief that if the people were in danger, their gods
would send a Hero to protect them? In this case, the vagueness would
be intentional—and rational. The prophecies were never meant to
mean someone specific, but more to speak of a general feeling. A
general hope."
If the prophecies
weren't specific, why could only she sense the drumming beats?
Stop it, she
told herself. You're jumping to conclusions. "All the
humans dead," she said. "How do we die off? The kandra kill
us?"
"Of course
not," OreSeur said. "We honor our Contract, even in
religion. The stories say that you'll kill yourselves off. You're of
Ruin, after all, while the kandra are of Preservation. You're . . .
actually supposed to destroy the world, I believe. Using the koloss
as your pawns."
"You actually
sound sorry for them," Vin noted with amusement.
"The kandra
actually tend to think well of the koloss, Mistress," OreSeur
said. "There is a bond between us; we both understand what it is
to be slaves, we both are outsiders to the culture of the Final
Empire, we both—"
He paused.
"What?"
Vin asked.
"Might I speak
no further?" OreSeur asked. "I have said too much already.
You put me off balance, Mistress."
Vin shrugged. "We
all need secrets." She glanced toward the door. "Though
there's one I still need to figure out."
OreSeur hopped down
from his chair, joining her as she strode out the door.
There was still a
spy somewhere in the palace. She'd been forced to ignore that fact
for far too long.
Elend looked deeply
into the well. The dark pit—widemouthed to accommodate the
comings and goings of numerous skaa—seemed a large mouth
opening up, stone lips spread and preparing to swallow him down.
Elend glanced to the side, where Ham stood speaking with a group of
healers.
"We first
noticed when so many people came to us complaining of diarrhea and
abdominal pains," the healer said. "The symptoms were
unusually strong, my lord. We've . . . already lost several to the
malady."
Ham glanced at
Elend, frowning.
"Everyone who
grew sick lived in this area," the healer continued. "And
drew their water from this well or another in the next square."
"Have you
brought this to the attention of Lord Penrod and the Assembly?"
Elend asked.
"Um, no, my
lord. We figured that you . . . "
I'm not king
anymore, Elend thought. However, he couldn't say the words. Not
to this man, looking for help.
"I'll take
care of it," Elend said, sighing. "You may return to your
patients."
"They are
filling our clinic, my lord," he said.
"Then
appropriate one of the empty noble mansions," Elend said. "There
are plenty of those. Ham, send him with some of my guard to help move
the sick and prepare the building."
Ham nodded, waving
over a soldier, telling him to gather twenty on-duty men from the
palace to meet with the healer. The healer smiled, looking relieved,
and bowed to Elend as he left.
Ham walked up,
joining Elend beside the well. "Coincidence?"
"Hardly,"
Elend said, gripping the edge if the well with frustrated fingers.
"The question is, which one poisoned it?"
"Cett just
came into the city," Ham said, rubbing his chin. "Would
have been easy to send out some soldiers to covertly drop in the
poison."
"Seems more
like something my father would do," Elend said. "Something
to increase our tension, to get back at us for playing him for a fool
in his camp. Plus, he's got that Mistborn who could have easily
placed the poison."
Of course, Cett had
had this same thing happen to him—Breeze poisoning his water
supply back before he reached the city. Elend ground his teeth. There
was really no way to know which one was behind the attack.
Either way, the
poisoned wells meant trouble. There were others in the city, of
course, but they were just as vulnerable. The people might have to
start relying on the river for their water, and it was far less
healthy, its waters muddy and polluted by waste from both the army
camps and the city itself.
"Set guards
around these wells," Elend said, waving a hand. "Board them
up, post warnings, and then tell the healers to watch with particular
care for other outbreaks."
We just keep
getting wound tighter and tighter, he thought as Ham nodded. At
this rate, we'll snap long before winter ends.
After a detour for
a late dinner—where some talk about servants getting sick left
her concerned—Vin went in and checked on Elend, who had just
returned from walking the city with Ham. After that, Vin and OreSeur
continued their original quest: that of finding Dockson.
They located him in
the palace library. The room had once been Straff's personal study;
Elend seemed to find the room's new purpose amusing for some reason.
Personally, Vin
didn't find the library's location nearly as amusing as its contents.
Or, rather, lack thereof. Though the room was lined with shelves,
nearly all of them showed signs of having been pillaged by Elend. The
rows of books lay pocked by forlorn empty spots, their companions
taken away one by one, as if Elend were a predator, slowly whittling
down a herd.
Vin smiled. It
probably wouldn't be too long before Elend had stolen every book in
the small library, carrying the tomes up to his study, then
forgetfully placing them in one of his piles—ostensibly for
return. Still, there were a large number of volumes left—ledgers,
books of figures, and notebooks on finances; things that Elend
usually found of little interest.
Dockson sat at the
library's desk now, writing in a ledger. He noticed her arrival, and
glanced over with a smile, but then turned back to his
notations—apparently not wanting to lose his place. Vin waited
for him to finish, OreSeur at her side.
Of all the members
of the crew, Dockson seemed to have changed the most during the last
year. She remembered her first impressions of him, back in Camon's
lair. Dockson had been Kelsier's right-hand man, and the more
"realistic" of the pair. And yet, there had always been an
edge of humor to Dockson—a sense that he enjoyed his role as
the straight man. He hadn't foiled Kelsier so much as complemented
him.
Kelsier was dead.
Where did that leave Dockson? He wore a nobleman's suit, as he always
had—and of all the crewmembers, the suits seemed to fit him the
best. If he shaved off the half beard, he could pass for a
nobleman—not a rich high courtier, but a lord in early middle
age who had lived his entire life trading goods beneath a great house
master.
He wrote in his
ledgers, but he had always done that. He still played the role of the
responsible one in the crew. So, what was different? He was the same
person, did the same things. He just felt different. The
laughter was gone; the quiet enjoyment of the eccentricity in those
around him. Without Kelsier, Dockson had somehow changed from
temperate to . . . boring.
And that was what
made her suspicious.
This has to be
done, she thought, smiling at Dockson as he set down his pen and
waved her to take a seat.
Vin sat down,
OreSeur padding over to stand beside her chair. Dockson eyed the dog,
shaking his head slightly. "That's such a remarkably
well-trained beast, Vin," he said. "I don't think I've ever
seen one quite like it . . . ."
Does he know?
Vin wondered with alarm. Would one kandra be able to recognize
another in a dog's body? No, that couldn't be. Otherwise OreSeur
could find the impostor for her. So, she simply smiled again, patting
OreSeur's head. "There is a trainer in the market. He teaches
wolfhounds to be protective—to stay with young children and
keep them out of danger."
Dockson nodded.
"So, any purpose to this visit?"
Vin shrugged. "We
never chat anymore, Dox."
Dockson sat back in
his chair. "This might not be the best time for chatting. I have
to prepare the royal finances to be taken over by someone else,
should the vote go against Elend."
Would a kandra
be able to do the ledgers? Vin wondered. Yes. They'd have
known—they'd have been prepared.
"I'm sorry,"
Vin said. "I don't mean to bother you, but Elend has been so
busy lately, and Sazed has his project . . . ."
"It's all
right," Dockson said. "I can spare a few minutes. What's on
your mind?"
"Well, do you
remember that conversation we had, back before the Collapse?"
Dockson frowned.
"Which one?"
"You know. . .
. The one about your childhood."
"Oh,"
Dockson said, nodding. "Yes, what about it?"
"Well, do you
still think the same way?"
Dockson paused
thoughtfully, fingers slowly tapping on the desktop. Vin waited,
trying not to show her tension. The conversation in question had been
between the two of them, and during it, Dockson had first spoken to
her of how much he'd hated the nobility.
"I suppose I
don't," Dockson said. "Not anymore. Kell always said that
you gave the nobility too much credit, Vin. But you started to change
even him there at the end. No, I don't think that noble society needs
to be completely destroyed. They aren't all monsters as once
presumed."
Vin relaxed. He not
only knew the conversation, he knew the details of the tangents
they'd discussed. She had been the only one there with him. That had
to mean that he wasn't the kandra, right?
"This is about
Elend, isn't it?" Dockson asked.
Vin shrugged. "I
suppose."
"I know that
you wish he and I could get along better, Vin. But, all things
considered, I think we're doing pretty well. He is a decent man; I
can acknowledge that. He has some faults as a leader: he lacks
boldness, lacks presence."
Not like
Kelsier.
"But,"
Dockson continued, "I don't want to see him lose his throne. He
has treated the skaa fairly, for a nobleman."
"He's a good
person, Dox," Vin said quietly.
Dockson looked
away. "I know that. But . . . well, every time I talk to him, I
see Kelsier standing over his shoulder, shaking his head at me. Do
you know how long Kell and I dreamed of toppling the Lord Ruler? The
other crewmembers, they thought Kelsier's plan was a newfound
passion—something that came to him in the Pits. But it was
older than that, Vin. Far older.
"We always
hated the nobility, Kell and I. When we were youths, planning our
first jobs, we wanted to be rich—but we also wanted to hurt
them. Hurt them for taking from us things they had no right to. My
love . . . Kelsier's mother. . . . Every coin we stole, every
nobleman we left dead in an alleyway—this was our way of waging
war. Our way of punishing them."
Vin sat quietly. It
was these kinds of stories, these memories of a haunted past, that
had always made her just a little uncomfortable with Kelsier—and
with the person he had been training her to become. It was this
sentiment that gave her pause, even when her instincts whispered that
she should go and exact retribution on Straff and Cett with knives in
the night.
Dockson held some
of that same hardness. Kell and Dox weren't evil men, but there was
an edge of vengefulness to them. Oppression had changed them in ways
that no amount of peace, reformation, or recompense could redeem.
Dockson shook his
head. "And we put one of them on the throne. I can't help but
think that Kell would be angry with me for letting Elend rule, no
matter how good a man he is."
"Kelsier
changed at the end," Vin said quietly. "You said it
yourself, Dox. Did you know that he saved Elend's life?"
Dockson turned,
frowning. "When?"
"On that last
day," Vin said. "During the fight with the Inquisitor. Kell
protected Elend, who came looking for me."
"Must have
thought he was one of the prisoners."
Vin shook her head.
"He knew who Elend was, and knew that I loved him. In the end,
Kelsier was willing to admit that a good man was worth protecting, no
matter who his parents were."
"I find that
hard to accept, Vin."
"Why?"
Dockson met her
eyes. "Because if I accept that Elend bears no guilt for what
his people did to mine, then I must admit to being a monster for the
things that I did to them."
Vin shivered. In
those eyes, she saw the truth behind Dockson's transformation. She
saw the death of his laughter. She saw the guilt. The murders.
This man is no
impostor.
"I can find
little joy in this government, Vin," Dockson said quietly.
"Because I know what we did to create it. The thing is, I'd do
it all again. I tell myself it's because I believe in skaa freedom. I
still lie awake at nights, however, quietly satisfied for what we've
done to our former rulers. Their society undermined, their god dead.
Now they know."
Vin nodded. Dockson
looked down, as if ashamed, an emotion she'd rarely seen in him.
There didn't seem to be anything else to say. Dockson sat quietly as
she withdrew, his pen and ledger forgotten on the desktop.
"It's not
him," Vin said, walking down an empty palace hallway, trying to
shake the haunting sound of Dockson's voice from her mind.
"You are
certain, Mistress?" OreSeur asked.
Vin nodded. "He
knew about a private conversation that Dockson and I had before the
Collapse."
OreSeur was silent
for a moment. "Mistress," he finally said, "my
brethren can be very thorough."
"Yes, but how
could he have known about such an event?"
"We often
interview people before we take their bones, Mistress," OreSeur
explained. "We'll meet them several times, in different
settings, and find ways to talk about their lives. We'll also talk to
their friends and acquaintances. Did you ever tell anyone about this
conversation you had with Dockson?"
Vin stopped to lean
against the side of the stone hallway. "Maybe Elend," she
admitted. "I think I mentioned it to Sazed too, just after it
happened. That was almost two years ago."
"That could
have been enough, Mistress," OreSeur said. "We cannot learn
everything about a person, but we try our best to discover items like
this—private conversations, secrets, confidential
information—so that we can mention them at appropriate times
and reinforce our illusion."
Vin frowned.
"There are . .
. other things as well, Mistress," OreSeur said. "I
hesitate because I do not wish you to imagine your friends in pain.
However, it is common for our master—the one who actually does
the killing—to torture their victim for information."
Vin closed her
eyes. Dockson felt so real . . . his guilt, his reactions . . . that
couldn't be faked, could it?
"Damn,"
she whispered quietly, opening her eyes. She turned, sighing as she
pushed open the shutters of a hallway window. It was dark out, and
the mists curled before her as she leaned against the stone
windowsill and looked out at the courtyard two stories below.
"Dox isn't an
Allomancer," she said. "How can I find out for certain if
he's the impostor or not?"
"I do not
know, Mistress," OreSeur said. "This is never an easy
task."
Vin stood quietly.
Absently, she pulled out her bronze earring—her mother's
earring—and worked it between her fingers, watching it reflect
light. It had once been gilded with silver, but that had worn off in
most places.
"I hate this,"
she finally whispered.
"What,
Mistress?"
"This . . .
distrust," she said. "I hate being suspicious of my
friends. I thought I was through mistrusting those around me. I feel
like a knife is twisting inside of me, and it cuts deeper every time
I confront one of the crew."
OreSeur sat on his
haunches beside her, and he cocked his head. "But, Mistress.
You've managed to eliminate several of them as impostors."
"Yes,"
Vin said. "But that only narrows the field—brings me one
step closer to knowing which one of them is dead."
"And that
knowledge isn't a good thing?"
Vin shook her head.
"I don't want it to be any of them, OreSeur. I don't want to
distrust them, don't want to find out that we're right . . . ."
OreSeur didn't
respond at first, leaving her to stare out the window, mists slowly
streaming to the floor around her.
"You are
sincere," OreSeur finally said.
She turned. "Of
course I am."
"I'm sorry,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "I did not wish to be insulting. I
just . . . Well, I have been kandra to many masters. So many of them
are suspicious and hateful of everyone around them, I had begun to
think that your kind lacked the capacity for trust."
"That's
silly," Vin said, turning back to the window.
"I know it
is," OreSeur said. "But people often believe silly things,
if given enough proof. Either way, I apologize. I do not know which
of your friends is dead, but I am sorry that one of my kind brought
you this pain."
"Whoever he
is, he's just following his Contract."
"Yes,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "The Contract."
Vin frowned. "Is
there a way that you could find out which kandra has a Contract in
Luthadel?"
"I'm sorry,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "That is not possible."
"I figured as
much," she said. "Are you likely to know him, whoever he
is?"
"The kandra
are a close-knit group, Mistress," OreSeur said. "And our
numbers are small. There is a good chance that I know him quite
well."
Vin tapped her
finger against the windowsill, frowning as she tried to decide if the
information was useful.
"I still don't
think it's Dockson," she finally said, replacing the earring.
"We'll ignore him for now. If I can't get any other leads, we'll
come back . . . " She trailed off as something caught her
attention. A figure walking in the courtyard, bearing no light.
Ham, she
thought. But the walk wasn't right.
She Pushed on the
shield of the lamp hanging on the wall a short distance away. It
snapped closed, the lamp shaking as the hallway fell into darkness.
"Mistress?"
OreSeur asked as Vin climbed up into the window, flaring her tin as
she squinted into the night.
Definitely not
Ham, she thought.
Her first thought
was of Elend—a sudden terror that assassins had come while she
was talking to Dockson. But, it was early in the night, and Elend
would still be speaking with his counselors. It was an unlikely time
for an assassination.
And only one man?
Not Zane, not judging from the height.
Probably just a
guard, Vin thought. Why do I have to be so paranoid all the
time?
And yet . . . she
watched the figure walking into the courtyard, and her instincts
kicked in. He seemed to be moving suspiciously, as if he were
uncomfortable—as if he didn't want to be seen.
"In my arms,"
she said to OreSeur, tossing a padded coin out the window.
He hopped up
obligingly, and she leaped out the window, fell twenty-five feet, and
landed with the coin. She released OreSeur and nodded into the mists.
He followed closely as she moved into the darkness, stooping and
hiding, trying to get a good look at the lone figure. The man walked
briskly, moving toward the side of the palace, where the servants'
entrances were. As he passed, she finally saw his face.
Captain Demoux?
she thought.
She sat back,
crouching with OreSeur beside a small stack of wooden supply boxes.
What did she really know of Demoux? He was one of the skaa rebels
recruited by Kelsier almost two years before. He'd taken to command,
and had been promoted quickly. He was one of the loyal men who had
stayed behind when the rest of the army had followed Yeden to their
doom.
After the Collapse,
he'd stayed in with the crew, eventually becoming Ham's second. He
had received no small amount of training from Ham—which might
explain why he'd go out at night without a torch or lantern. But,
even so . . . .
If I were going
to replace someone on the crew, Vin thought, I wouldn't pick
an Allomancer—that would make the impostor too easy to spot.
I'd pick someone ordinary, someone who wouldn't have to make
decisions or attract notice.
Someone close to
the crew, but not necessarily on it. Someone who is always near
important meetings, but someone that others don't really know that
well . . . .
She felt a small
thrill. If the impostor were Demoux, it would mean that one of her
good friends hadn't been killed. And it would mean that the
kandra's master was even smarter than she'd given him credit for
being.
He rounded the
keep, and she followed quietly. However, whatever he'd been doing
this night, it was already completed—for he moved in through
one of the entrances on the side of the building, greeting the guards
posted there to watch.
Vin sat back in the
shadows. He'd spoken to the guards, so he hadn't snuck out of the
palace. And yet . . . she recognized the stooped posture, the nervous
movements. He'd been nervous about something.
That's him,
she thought. The spy.
But now, what
should she do about it?
There was a
place for me, in the lore of the Anticipation—I thought myself
the Announcer, the prophet foretold to discover the Hero of Ages.
Renouncing Alendi then would have been to renounce my new position,
my acceptance, by the others.
And so I did
not.





34
"THAT WON'T
WORK," ELEND SAID, shaking his head. "We need a unanimous
decision—minus the person being ousted, of course—in
order to depose a member of the Assembly. We'd never manage to vote
out all eight merchants."
Ham looked a bit
deflated. Elend knew that Ham liked to consider himself a
philosopher; indeed, Ham had a good mind for abstract thinking.
However, he wasn't a scholar. He liked to think up questions and
answers, but he didn't have experience studying a text in detail,
searching out its meaning and implications.
Elend glanced at
Sazed, who sat with a book open on the table before him. The Keeper
had at least a dozen volumes stacked around him—though,
amusingly, his stacks were neatly arranged, spines pointing the same
direction, covers flush. Elend's own stacks were characteristically
haphazard, pages of notes sticking out at odd angles.
It was amazing how
many books one could fit into a room, assuming one didn't want to
move around very much. Ham sat on the floor, a small pile of books
beside him, though he spent most of his time voicing one random idea
or another. Tindwyl had a chair, and did not study. The Terriswoman
found it perfectly acceptable to train Elend as a king; however, she
refused to research and give suggestions about keeping his throne.
This seemed, in her eyes, to cross some unseen line between being an
educator and a political force.
Good thing Sazed
isn't like that, Elend thought. If he were, the Lord Ruler
might still be in charge. In fact, Vin and I would probably both be
dead—Sazed was the one who actually rescued her when she was
imprisoned by the Inquisitors. It wasn't me.
He didn't like to
think about that event. His bungled attempt at rescuing Vin now
seemed a metaphor for all he had done wrong in his life. He'd always
been well-intentioned, but he'd rarely been able to deliver. That was
going to change.
"What about
this, Your Majesty?" The one who spoke was the only other person
in the room, a scholar named Noorden. Elend tried to ignore the
intricate tattoos around the man's eyes, indications of Noorden's
former life as an obligator. He wore large spectacles to try to hide
the tattoos, but he had once been relatively well placed in the Steel
Ministry. He could renounce his beliefs, but the tattoos would always
remain.
"What have you
found?" Elend asked.
"Some
information on Lord Cett, Your Majesty," Noorden said. "I
found it in one of the ledgers you took from the Lord Ruler's palace.
It seems Cett isn't as indifferent to Luthadel politics as he'd like
us to think." Noorden chuckled to himself at the thought.
Elend had never met
a cheerful obligator before. Perhaps that was why Noorden hadn't left
the city like most of his kind; he certainly didn't seem to fit into
their ranks. He was only one of several men that Elend had been able
to find to act as scribes and bureaucrats in his new kingdom.
Elend scanned
Noorden's page. Though the page was filled with numbers rather than
words, his scholar's mind easily parsed the information. Cett had
done a lot of trading with Luthadel. Most of his work had been done
using lesser houses as fronts. That might have fooled noblemen, but
not the obligators, who had to be informed of the terms of any deal.
Noorden passed the
ledger over to Sazed, who scanned the numbers.
"So,"
Noorden said, "Lord Cett wanted to appear unconnected to
Luthadel—the beard and the attitude only serving to reinforce
that impression. Yet, he always had a very quiet hand in things
here."
Elend nodded.
"Maybe he realized that you can't avoid politics by pretending
you're not part of them. There's no way he would have been able to
grab as much power as he did without some solid political
connections."
"So, what does
this tell us?" Sazed asked.
"That Cett is
far more accomplished at the game than he wants people to believe,"
Elend said, standing, then stepping over a pile of books as he made
his way back to his chair. "But, I think that much was obvious
by the way he manipulated me and the Assembly yesterday."
Noorden chuckled.
"You should have seen the way you all looked, Your Majesty. When
Cett revealed himself, a few of the noble Assemblymen actually jumped
in their seats! I think the rest of you were too shocked to—"
"Noorden?"
Elend said.
"Yes, Your
Majesty?"
"Please focus
on the task at hand."
"Um, yes, Your
Majesty."
"Sazed?"
Elend asked. "What do you think?"
Sazed looked up
from his book—a codified and annotated version of the city's
charter, as written by Elend himself. The Terrisman shook his head.
"You did a very good job with this, I think. I can see very few
methods of preventing Lord Cett's appointment, should the Assembly
choose him."
"Too competent
for your own good?" Noorden said.
"A problem
which, unfortunately, I've rarely had," Elend said, sitting and
rubbing his eyes.
Is this how Vin
feels all the time? he wondered. She got less sleep than he, and
she was always moving about, running, fighting, spying. Yet, she
always seemed fresh. Elend was beginning to droop after just a couple
of days of hard study.
Focus, he
told himself. You have to know your enemies so that you can fight
them. There has to be a way out of this.
Dockson was still
composing letters to the other Assemblymen. Elend wanted to meet with
those who were willing. Unfortunately, he had a feeling that number
would be small. They had voted him out, and now they had been
presented with an option that seemed an easy way out of their
problems.
"Your Majesty
. . . " Noorden said slowly. "Do you think, maybe, that we
should just let Cett take the throne? I mean, how bad could he be?"
Elend stopped. One
of the reasons he employed the former obligator was because of
Noorden's different view-point. He wasn't a skaa, nor was he a high
nobleman. He wasn't a thief. He was just a scholarly little man who
had joined the Ministry because it had offered an option other than
becoming a merchant.
To him, the Lord
Ruler's death had been a catastrophe that had destroyed his entire
way of life. He wasn't a bad man, but he had no real understanding of
the plight of the skaa.
"What do you
think of the laws I've made, Noorden?" Elend asked.
"They're
brilliant, Your Majesty," Noorden said. "Keen
representations of the ideals spoken of by old philosophers, along
with a strong element of modern realism."
"Will Cett
respect these laws?" Elend asked.
"I don't know.
I haven't ever really met the man."
"What do your
instincts tell you?"
Noorden hesitated.
"No," he finally said. "He isn't the type of man who
rules by law. He just does what he wants."
"He would
bring only chaos," Elend said. "Look at the information we
have from his homeland and the places he's conquered. They are in
turmoil. He's left a patchwork of half alliances and promises—threats
of invasion acting as the thread that—barely—holds it all
together. Giving him rule of Luthadel would just set us up for
another collapse."
Noorden scratched
his cheek, then nodded thoughtfully and turned back to his reading.
I can convince
him, Elend thought. If only I could do the same for the
Assemblymen.
But Noorden was a
scholar; he thought the way Elend did. Logical facts were enough for
him, and a promise of stability was more powerful than one of wealth.
The Assembly was a different beast entirely. The noblemen wanted a
return to what they'd known before; the merchants saw an opportunity
to grab the titles they'd always envied; and the skaa were simply
worried about a brutal slaughter.
And yet, even those
were generalizations. Lord Penrod saw himself as the city's
patriarch—the ranking nobleman, the one who needed to bring a
measure of conservative temperance to their problems. Kinaler, one of
the steel-workers, was worried that the Central Dominance needed a
kinship with the kingdoms around it, and saw an alliance with Cett as
the best way to protect Luthadel in the long run.
Each of the
twenty-three Assemblymen had their own thoughts, goals, and problems.
That was what Elend had intended; ideas proliferated in such an
environment. He just hadn't expected so many of their ideas to
contradict his own.
"You were
right, Ham," Elend said, turning.
Ham looked up,
raising an eyebrow.
"At the
beginning of this all, you and the others wanted to make an alliance
with one of the armies—give them the city in exchange for
keeping it safe from the other armies."
"I remember,"
Ham said.
"Well, that's
what the people want," Elend said. "With or without my
consent, it appears they're going to give the city to Cett. We should
have just gone with your plan."
"Your
Majesty?" Sazed asked quietly.
"Yes?"
"My apologies,
but it is not your duty to do what the people want."
Elend blinked. "You
sound like Tindwyl."
"I have known
few people as wise as she, Your Majesty," Sazed said, glancing
at her.
"Well, I
disagree with both of you," Elend said. "A ruler should
only lead by the consent of the people he rules."
"I do not
disagree with that, Your Majesty," Sazed said. "Or, at
least, I do believe in the theory of it. Regardless, I still do not
believe that your duty is to do as the people wish. Your duty is to
lead as best you can, following the dictates of your conscience. You
must be true, Your Majesty, to the man you wish to become. If that
man is not whom the people wish to have lead them, then they will
choose someone else."
Elend paused. Well,
of course. If I shouldn't be an exception to my own laws, I shouldn't
be an exception to my own ethics, either. Sazed's words were
really just a rephrasing of things Tindwyl had said about trusting
oneself, but Sazed's explanation seemed a better one. A more honest
one.
"Trying to
guess what people wish of you will only lead to chaos, I think,"
Sazed said. "You cannot please them all, Elend Venture."
The study's small
ventilation window bumped open, and Vin squeezed through, pulling in
a puff of mist behind her. She closed the window, then surveyed the
room.
"More?"
she asked incredulously. "You found more books?"
"Of course,"
Elend said.
"How many of
those things have people written?" she asked with exasperation.
Elend opened his
mouth, then paused as he saw the twinkle in her eye. Finally, he just
sighed. "You're hopeless," he said, turning back to his
letters.
He heard rustling
from behind, and a moment later Vin landed on one of his stacks of
books, somehow managing to balance atop it. Her mistcloak tassels
hung down around her, smudging the ink on his letter.
Elend sighed.
"Oops,"
Vin said, pulling back the mistcloak. "Sorry."
"Is it really
necessary to leap around like that all the time, Vin?" Elend
asked.
Vin jumped down.
"Sorry," she repeated, biting her lip. "Sazed says
it's because Mistborn like to be up high, so we can see everything
that's going on."
Elend nodded,
continuing the letter. He preferred them to be in his own hand, but
he'd need to have a scribe rewrite this one. He shook his head. So
much to do . . . .
Vin watched Elend
scribble. Sazed sat reading, as did one of Elend's scribes—the
obligator. She eyed the man, and he shrank down a little in his seat.
He knew that she'd never trusted him. Priests shouldn't be cheerful.
She was excited to
tell Elend what she'd discovered about Demoux, but she hesitated.
There were too many people around, and she didn't really have any
evidence—just her instincts. So, she held herself back, looking
over the stacks of books.
There was a dull
quiet in the room. Tindwyl sat with her eyes slightly glazed; she was
probably studying some ancient biography in her mind. Even Ham was
reading, though he flipped from book to book, hopping topics. Vin
felt as if she should be studying something, too. She thought of the
notes she'd been making about the Deepness and the Hero of Ages, but
couldn't bring herself to get them out.
She couldn't tell
him about Demoux, yet, but there was something else she'd
discovered.
"Elend,"
she said quietly. "I have something to tell you."
"Humm?"
"I heard the
servants talking when OreSeur and I got dinner earlier," Vin
said. "Some people they know have been sick lately—a lot
of them. I think that someone might be fiddling with our supplies."
"Yes,"
Elend said, still writing. "I know. Several wells in the city
have been poisoned."
"They have?"
He nodded. "Didn't
I tell you when you checked on me earlier? That's where Ham and I
were."
"You didn't
tell me."
"I thought I
did," Elend said, frowning.
Vin shook her head.
"I apologize,"
he said, leaned up and kissed her, then turned back to his
scribbling.
And a kiss is
supposed to make it all right? she thought sullenly, sitting back
on a stack of books.
It was a silly
thing; there was really no reason that Elend should have told
her so quickly. And yet, the exchange left her feeling odd. Before,
he would have asked her to do something about the problem. Now, he'd
apparently handled it all on his own.
Sazed sighed,
closing his tome. "Your Majesty, I can find no holes. I have
read your laws over six times now."
Elend nodded. "I
feared as much. The only advantage we could gain from the law is to
misinterpret it intentionally—which I will not do."
"You are a
good man, Your Majesty," Sazed said. "If you had seen a
hole in the law, you would have fixed it. Even if you hadn't caught
the flaws, one of us would have, when you asked for our opinions."
He lets them
call him "Your Majesty," Vin thought. He tried to
get them to stop that. Why let them use it now?
Odd, that Elend
would finally start to think of himself as king after the throne had
been taken from him.
"Wait,"
Tindwyl said, eyes unglazing. "You read over this law before it
was ratified, Sazed?"
Sazed flushed.
"He did,"
Elend said. "In fact, Sazed's suggestions and ideas were
instrumental in helping me craft the current code."
"I see,"
Tindwyl said through tight lips.
Elend frowned.
"Tindwyl, you were not invited to this meeting. You are suffered
at it. Your advice has been well appreciated, but I will not allow
you to insult a friend and guest of my household, even if those
insults are indirect."
"I apologize,
Your Majesty."
"You will not
apologize to me," Elend said. "You will apologize to Sazed,
or you will leave this conference."
Tindwyl sat for a
moment; then she stood and left the room. Elend didn't appear
offended. He simply turned back to writing his letters.
"You didn't
need to do that, Your Majesty," Sazed said. "Tindwyl's
opinions of me are well founded, I think."
"I will do as
I see fit, Sazed," Elend said, still writing. "No offense,
my friend, but you have a history of letting people treat you poorly.
I won't stand for it in my house—by insulting your help with my
laws, she insulted me as well."
Sazed nodded, then
reached over to pick up a new volume.
Vin sat quietly.
He's changing so quickly. How long has it been since Tindwyl
arrived? Two months? None of the things Elend said were that
different from what he would have said before—but the way he
said them was completely different. He was firm, demanding in a way
that implied he expected respect.
It's the
collapse of his throne, the danger of the armies, Vin thought.
The pressures are forcing him to change, to either step up and
lead or get crushed. He'd known about the wells. What other
things had he discovered, and not told her?
"Elend?"
Vin asked. "I've thought more about the Deepness."
"That's
wonderful, Vin," Elend said, smiling at her. "But, I really
don't have time right now . . . ."
Vin nodded, and
smiled at him. However, her thoughts were more troubled. He's not
uncertain, like he once was. He doesn't have to rely on people as
much for support.
He doesn't need
me anymore.
It was a foolish
thought. Elend loved her; she knew that. His aptitude wouldn't make
her less valuable to him. And yet, she couldn't stamp out her
worries. He'd left her once before, when he'd been trying to juggle
the needs of his house with his love for her, and the action had
nearly crushed her.
What would happen
if he abandoned her now?
He won't,
she told herself. He's a better man than that.
But, good men had
failed relationships, didn't they? People grew apart—particularly
people who were so different to begin with. Despite herself—despite
her self-assurances—she heard a small voice pop up in the back
of her mind.
It was a voice
she'd thought banished, a voice she hadn't ever expected to hear
again.
Leave him first,
Reen, her brother, seemed to whisper in her head. It will hurt
less.
Vin heard a
rustling outside. She perked up slightly, but it had been too soft
for the others to hear. She stood, walking over to the ventilation
window.
"Going back on
patrol?" Elend asked.
She turned, then
nodded.
"You might
want to scout out Cett's defenses at Keep Hasting," Elend said.
Vin nodded again.
Elend smiled at her, then turned back to his letters. Vin pulled open
the window and stepped out into the night. Zane stood in the mists,
feet barely resting against the stone lip running beneath the window.
He stood at a skewed angle, feet against the wall, body jutting out
into the night.
Vin glanced to the
side, noting the bit of metal that Zane was Pulling against to hold
himself stationary. Another feat of prowess. He smiled at her in the
night.
"Zane?"
she whispered.
Zane glanced
upward, and Vin nodded. A second later, they both landed atop Keep
Venture's metal roof.
Vin turned to Zane.
"Where have you been?"
He attacked.
Vin jumped back in
surprise as Zane spun forward, a swirling form in black, knives
twinkling. She came down with her feet half off the rooftop, tense. A
spar, then? she thought.
Zane struck, his
knife coming dangerously close to her neck as she dodged to the side.
There was something different about his attacks this time. Something
more dangerous.
Vin cursed and
pulled out her own daggers, jumping back from another attack. As she
moved, Zane sliced through the air, cutting the tip off one of her
mistcloak tassels.
She turned to face
him. He walked forward, but held no combat posture. He seemed
confident, yet unconcerned, as if he were strolling up to an old
friend, not entering a fight.
All right then,
she thought, jumping forward, swiping with her daggers.
Zane stepped
forward casually, turning just slightly to the side, easily dodging
one knife. He reached out, grabbing her other hand with an effortless
motion, stopping its blow.
Vin froze. Nobody
was that good. Zane looked down at her, eyes dark. Unconcerned.
Unworried.
He was burning
atium.
Vin pulled free of
his grip, jumping backward. He let her go, watching as she fell into
a crouch, sweat beading on her brow. She felt a sudden, sharp stab of
terror—a guttural, primal feeling. She had feared this day from
the moment she'd learned of atium. It was the terror of knowing she
was powerless, despite all of her skills and abilities.
It was the terror
of knowing she was going to die.
She turned to jump
away, but Zane leaped forward before she even began to move. He knew
what she would do before she did herself. He grabbed her shoulder
from behind, pulling her backward, throwing her down to the rooftop.
Vin slammed against
the metal roofing, gasping in pain. Zane stood above her, looking
down, as if waiting.
I won't be
beaten this way! Vin thought with desperation. I won't be
killed like a trapped rat!
She reached and
swung a knife at his leg, but it was useless. He pulled the leg back
slightly—just enough—so that her swing didn't even nick
the cloth of his trousers. She was like a child, being held at a
distance by a much larger, more powerful foe. This was what it must
be like, being a normal person, trying to fight her.
Zane stood in the
darkness.
"What?"
she finally demanded.
"You really
don't have it," he said quietly. "The Lord Ruler's atium
stash."
"No," she
said.
"You don't
have any at all," he said flatly.
"I used the
last bead the day I fought Cett's assassins."
He stood for a
moment; then he turned, stepping away from her. Vin sat up, heart
thumping, hands shaking just a bit. She forced herself to her feet,
then stooped and retrieved her fallen daggers. One had cracked
against the roof's copper top.
Zane turned back
toward her, quiet in the mists.
Zane watched her in
the darkness, saw her fear—yet also her determination.
"My father
wants me to kill you," Zane said.
She stood, watching
him, eyes still afraid. She was strong, and she repressed the fear
well. The news from their spy, the words Vin had spoken while
visiting Straff's tent, were all true. There was no atium to be had
in this city.
"Is that why
you stayed away?" she asked.
He nodded, turning
away from her.
"So?" she
asked. "Why let me live?"
"I'm not
sure," he admitted. "I may still kill you. But . . . I
don't have to. Not to fulfill his order. I could just take you
away—that would have the same effect."
He turned back
toward her. She was frowning, a small, quiet figure in the mists.
"Come with
me," he said. "Both of us could leave—Straff would
lose his Mistborn, and Elend would lose his. We could deny them both
their tools. And we could be free."
She didn't respond
immediately. Finally, she shook her head. "This . . . thing
between us, Zane. It isn't what you think."
"What do you
mean?" he said, stepping forward.
She looked up at
him. "I love Elend, Zane. I really do."
And you think
that means you can't feel anything for me? Zane thought. What
of that look I've seen in your eyes, that longing? No, it isn't as
easy as you imply, is it?
It never is.
And yet, what else
had he expected? He turned away. "It makes sense. That's the way
it has always been."
"What is that
supposed to mean?" she demanded.
Elend . . .
.
"Kill him,"
God whispered.
Zane squeezed his
eyes shut. She would not be fooled; not a woman who had grown up on
the streets, a woman who was friends with thieves and scammers. This
was the difficult part. She would need to see things that terrified
Zane.
She would need
truth.
"Zane?"
Vin asked. She still seemed a bit shaken by his attack, but she was
the type who recovered quickly.
"Can't you see
the resemblance?" Zane asked, turning. "The same nose, the
same slant of the face? I cut my hair shorter than he, but it has the
same curl. Is it so hard to see?"
Her breath caught
in her throat.
"Who else
would Straff Venture trust as his Mistborn?" Zane asked. "Why
else would he let me get so close, why else would he feel so
comfortable letting me in on his plans?"
"You're his
son," Vin whispered. "Elend's brother."
Zane nodded.
"Elend . . . "
"Doesn't know
of me," Zane said. "Ask him about our father's sexual
habits sometime."
"He's told
me," Vin said. "Straff likes mistresses."
"For more than
one reason," Zane said. "More women means more children.
More children means more Allomancers. More Allomancers means more
chances at having a Mistborn son to be your assassin."
Breeze-blown mist
washed over them. In the distance, a soldier's armor clinked as he
patrolled.
"While the
Lord Ruler lived, I could never inherit," Zane said. "You
know how strict the obligators were. I grew up in the shadows,
ignored. You lived on the streets—I assume that was terrible.
But, think of what it would be like to be a scavenger in your own
home, unacknowledged by your father, treated like a beggar. Think of
watching your brother, a boy your same age, growing up privileged.
Think of watching his disdain for the things you longed to have.
Comfort, idleness, love . . . "
"You must hate
him," Vin whispered.
"Hate?"
Zane asked. "No. Why hate a man for what he is? Elend has done
nothing to me, not directly. Besides, Straff found a reason to need
me, eventually—after I Snapped, and he finally got what he'd
been gambling to get for the last twenty years No, I don't hate
Elend. Sometimes, however, I do envy him. He has everything. And
still . . . it seems to me like he doesn't appreciate it."
Vin stood quietly.
"I'm sorry."
Zane shook his head
sharply. "Don't pity me, woman. If I were Elend, I wouldn't be
Mistborn. I wouldn't understand the mists, nor would I know what it
was like to grow up alone and hated." He turned, looking into
her eyes. "Don't you think a man better appreciates love when he
has been forced for so long to go without?"
"I . . . "
Zane turned away.
"Anyway," he said, "I didn't come here tonight to
lament my childhood. I came with a warning."
Vin grew tense.
"A short time
ago," Zane said, "my father let several hundred refugees
through his barricade to approach the city. You know of the koloss
army?"
Vin nodded.
"It attacked
and pillaged the city of Suisna earlier."
Vin felt a start of
fright. Suisna was only a day away from Luthadel. The koloss were
close.
"The refugees
came to my father for help," Zane said. "He sent them on to
you."
"To make the
people of the city more afraid," Vin said. "And to provide
a further drain on our resources."
Zane nodded. "I
wanted to give you warning. Both of the refugees, and of my orders.
Think about my offer, Vin. Think about this man who claims to love
you. You know he doesn't understand you. If you leave, it will be
better for both of you."
Vin frowned. Zane
bowed his head slightly to her, then jumped into the night, Pushing
against the metal rooftop. She still didn't believe him about Elend.
He could see that in her eyes.
Well, proof was
coming. She'd soon see. She'd soon understand what Elend Venture
truly thought of her.
But I do so now.
Let it be known that I, Kwaan, Worldbringer of Terris, am a fraud.





35
IT FELT LIKE SHE
WAS going to a ball again.
The beautiful
maroon gown would have fit in perfectly at one of the parties she had
attended during the months before the Collapse. The dress was
untraditional, but not unfashionable. The changes simply made the
dress seem distinctive.
The alterations
left her freer to move; let her walk more gracefully, turn more
naturally. That, in turn, made her feel even more beautiful. Standing
before her mirror, Vin thought of what it might have been like to
wear the dress to a real ball. To be herself—not Valette, the
uncomfortable country noblewoman. Not even Vin, the skaa thief. To be
herself.
Or, at least, as
she could imagine herself. Confident because she accepted her place
as a Mistborn. Confident because she accepted her place as the one
who had struck down the Lord Ruler. Confident because she knew that
the king loved her.
Maybe I
could be both, Vin thought, running her hands down the sides
of the dress, feeling the soft satin.
"You look
beautiful, child," Tindwyl said.
Vin turned, smiling
hesitantly. "I don't have any jewelry. I gave the last of it to
Elend to help feed the refugees. It was the wrong color to go with
this dress anyway."
"Many women
use jewelry to try and hide their own plainness," Tindwyl said.
"You don't have that need."
The Terriswoman
stood with her usual posture, hands clasped before her, rings and
earrings sparkling. None of her jewelry, however, had gemstones; in
fact, most of it was made from simple materials. Iron, copper,
pewter. Feruchemical metals.
"You haven't
been in to see Elend lately," Vin said, turning back to the
mirror and using a few wooden barrettes to hold her hair back.
"The king is
quickly approaching the point where he no longer needs my
instruction."
"He's that
close then?" Vin asked. "To being like the men from your
biographies?"
Tindwyl laughed.
"Goodness, no, child. He's quite far from that."
"But—"
"I said he
would no longer need my instruction," Tindwyl said. "He is
learning that he can rely only so much upon the words of others, and
has reached the point where he will have to learn more for himself.
You would be surprised, child, how much about being a good leader
simply comes from experience."
"He seems very
different to me," Vin said quietly.
"He is,"
Tindwyl said, walking forward to lay a hand on Vin's shoulder. "He
is becoming the man that he always knew he would have to be—he
just didn't know the path. Though I am hard on him, I think he would
have found his way, even if I hadn't come. A man can only stumble for
so long before he either falls or stands up straight."
Vin looked at her
mirror self, pretty in its maroon dressings. "This is what I
have to become. For him."
"For him,"
Tindwyl agreed. "And for yourself. This is where you were
heading, before you got distracted."
Vin turned. "Are
you going to come with us tonight?"
Tindwyl shook her
head. "That is not my place. Now, go meet your king."
This time, Elend
did not intend to enter his enemy's lair without a proper escort. Two
hundred soldiers stood in the courtyard, waiting to accompany him to
Cett's dinner, and Ham—fully armed—was playing personal
bodyguard. Spook would act as Elend's coachman. That only left
Breeze, who—understandably—was a bit nervous about the
idea of going to the dinner.
"You don't
have to come," Elend told the portly man as they assembled in
the Venture courtyard.
"I don't?"
Breeze said. "Well then, I shall remain here. Enjoy the dinner!"
Elend paused,
frowning.
Ham clapped Elend
on the shoulder. "You should know better than to give that one
any wiggle room, Elend!"
"Well, I meant
my words," Elend said. "We could really use a Soother, but
he doesn't have to come if he doesn't want to."
Breeze looked
relieved.
"You don't
even feel a bit guilty, do you?" Ham asked.
"Guilty?"
Breeze asked, hand resting on his cane. "My dear Hammond, have
you ever known me to express such a dreary and uninspired
emotion? Besides, I have a feeling Cett will be more amiable without
me around."
He's probably
right, Elend thought as his coach pulled up.
"Elend,"
Ham said. "Don't you think bringing two hundred soldiers with us
is . . . well, a little obvious?"
"Cett is the
one who said we should be honest with our threats," Elend said.
"Well, I'd say two hundred men is on the conservative side of
how well I trust the man. He'll still have us outnumbered five to
one."
"But you'll
have a Mistborn sitting a few seats from him," a soft voice said
from behind.
Elend turned,
smiling at Vin. "How can you possibly move so quietly in a dress
like that?"
"I've been
practicing," she said, taking his arm.
Thing is, she
probably has, he thought, inhaling her perfume, imagining Vin
creeping through the palace hallways in a massive ball gown.
"Well, we
should get moving," Ham said. He gestured for Vin and Elend to
enter the carriage, and they left Breeze behind on the palace steps.
After a year of
passing Keep Hasting in the night, its windows darkened, it felt
right to see them glowing again.
"You know,"
Elend said from beside her, "we never did get to attend a ball
together."
Vin turned from her
contemplation of the approaching keep. Around her, the carriage
bounced along to the sound of several hundred tromping feet, the
evening just beginning to grow dark.
"We met up
several times at the balls," Elend continued, "but we never
officially attended one together. I never got the chance to pick you
up in my carriage."
"Is that
really so important?" Vin asked.
Elend shrugged.
"It's all part of the experience. Or, it was. There was a
comfortable formality to it all; the gentleman arriving to accompany
the lady, then everyone watching you enter and evaluating how you
look together. I did it dozens of times with dozens of women, but
never with the one that would have made the experience special."
Vin smiled. "Do
you think we'll ever have balls again?"
"I don't know,
Vin. Even if we survive all of this . . . well, could you dance while
so many people starved?" He was probably thinking about the
hundreds of refugees, wearied from their travels, stripped of all
food and equipment by Straff's soldiers, huddled together in the
warehouse Elend had found for them.
You danced
before, she thought. People starved then, too. But that
was a different time; Elend hadn't been king then. In fact, as she
thought about it, he had never actually danced at those balls. He had
studied and met with his friends, planning how he could make a better
place out of the Final Empire.
"There has to
be a way to have both," Vin said. "Maybe we could throw
balls, and ask the nobility who came to donate money to help feed the
people."
Elend smiled. "We'd
probably spend twice as much on the party as we got in donations."
"And the money
we spent would go to skaa merchants."
Elend paused
thoughtfully, and Vin smirked to herself. Odd that I would end up
with the only frugal nobleman in the city. What a pair they
were—a Mistborn who felt guilty wasting coins to jump and a
nobleman who thought balls were too expensive. It was a wonder that
Dockson could pry enough money out of them to keep the city running.
"We'll worry
about that later," Elend said as the Hasting gates opened,
revealing a field of soldiers at attention.
You can bring
your soldiers if you want, the display seemed to say. I've got
more. In reality, they were entering a strange allegory of
Luthadel itself. Elend's two hundred were now surrounded by Cett's
thousand—which, in turn, were surrounded by Luthadel's twenty
thousand. The city, of course, was then surrounded by nearly a
hundred thousand troops on the outside. Layer upon layer of soldiers,
all tensely waiting for a fight. Thoughts of balls and parties fled
her mind.
Cett did not greet
them at the door. That duty was performed by a soldier in a simple
uniform.
"Your soldiers
can remain here," the man said as they entered the main
entryway. Once, the large, pillared room had been draped in fine rugs
and wall hangings, but Elend had taken those to fund his government.
Cett, obviously, hadn't brought replacements, and that left the
inside of the keep feeling austere. Like a battlefront fortress,
rather than a mansion.
Elend turned,
waving to Demoux, and the captain ordered his men to wait indoors.
Vin stood for a moment, consciously keeping herself from shooting a
glare at Demoux. If he was the kandra, as her instincts
warned, then it was dangerous to have him too close. Part of her
itched to simply throw him in a dungeon.
And yet, a kandra
couldn't hurt humans, so he wasn't a direct threat. He was simply
there to relay information. Plus, he'd already know their most
sensitive secrets; there was little point in striking now, playing
her hand so quickly. If she waited, saw where he went when he slipped
out of the city, then maybe she could find out which army—or
sect in the city—he was reporting to. Learn what information he
had betrayed.
And so, she stayed
her hand, waiting. The time to strike would come.
Ham and Demoux
arranged their men, and then a smaller honor guard—including
Ham, Spook, and Demoux—gathered to stay with Vin and Elend.
Elend nodded to Cett's man, and the soldier led them down a side
passageway.
We're not
heading toward the lifts, Vin thought. The Hasting ballroom was
at the very top of the keep's central tower; the times she had
attended balls in the structure, she had been taken to the top on one
of four human-drawn lifts. Either Hasting didn't want to waste the
manpower, or . . .
He picked the
tallest keep in the city, Vin thought. The one with the fewest
windows as well. If Cett pulled all the lifts to the top, it
would be very difficult for an invading force to claim the keep.
Fortunately, it
didn't appear that they would have to go all the way to the top this
evening. After they climbed two flights in a twisting stone
stairwell—Vin having to pull her dress in at the sides to keep
from brushing against the stones—their guide led them out into
a large, circular room with stained-glass windows running around the
entire perimeter, broken only by columns to support the ceiling. The
single room was nearly as wide around as the tower itself.
A secondary
ballroom, perhaps? Vin wondered, taking in the beauty. The glass
wasn't lit, though she suspected that there were clefts for
limelights on the outside. Cett didn't appear to care about such
things. He had set up a large table in the very center of the room,
and sat at its head. He was already eating.
"You're late,"
he called out to Elend, "so I started without you."
Elend frowned. To
this, Cett laughed a full bellow, holding up a drumstick. "You
seem more aghast at my breach of etiquette than you do about the fact
that I brought an army to conquer you, boy! But, I suppose that's
Luthadel. Sit down before I eat this all myself."
Elend held out an
arm for Vin, leading her to the table. Spook took up position near
the stairwell, his Tineye's ears listening for danger. Ham led their
ten men to a position from which they could watch the only entrances
to the room—the entry from the stairs and the door the serving
staff used.
Cett ignored the
soldiers. He had a group of his own bodyguards standing near the wall
on the other side of the room, but he seemed unconcerned that Ham's
troop had them slightly outnumbered. His son—the young man who
had attended him at the Assembly meeting—stood at his side,
waiting quietly.
One of the two
has to be Mistborn, Vin thought. And I still think it is Cett.
Elend seated her,
then took a chair next to her, both of them sitting directly across
from Cett. He barely paused in his eating as the servers brought
Vin's and Elend's dishes.
Drumsticks,
Vin thought, and vegetables in gravy. He wants this to be a messy
meal—he wants to make Elend uncomfortable.
Elend didn't start
on his food immediately. He sat, watching Cett, his expression
thoughtful.
"Damn,"
Cett said. "This is good food. You have no idea how hard it is
to get proper meals when traveling!"
"Why did you
want to speak with me?" Elend asked. "You know I won't be
convinced to vote for you."
Cett shrugged. "I
thought it might be interesting."
"Is this about
your daughter?" Elend asked.
"Lord Ruler,
no!" Cett said with a laugh. "Keep the silly thing, if you
want. The day she ran off was one of the few joys I've had this last
month."
"And if I
threaten to harm her?" Elend asked.
"You won't,"
Cett said.
"You're
certain?"
Cett smiled through
his thick beard, leaning toward Elend. "I know you, Venture. I'd
been watching you, studying you, for months. And then, you were kind
enough to send one of your friends to spy on me. I learned a lot
about you from him!"
Elend looked
troubled.
Cett laughed.
"Honestly, you didn't think I'd recognize one of the Survivor's
own crewmembers? You Luthadel noblemen must assume that everyone
outside the city is a damn fool!"
"And yet, you
listened to Breeze," Elend said. "You let him join you,
listened to his advice. And then, you only chased him away when you
found him being intimate with your daughter—the one you claim
to have no affection for."
"Is that
why he told you he left the camp?" Cett asked, laughing.
"Because I caught him with Allrianne? Goodness, what do I care
if the girl seduced him?"
"You think she
seduced him?" Vin asked.
"Of course,"
Cett said. "Honestly, I only spent a few weeks with him, and
even I know how useless he is with women."
Elend was taking
all this in stride. He watched Cett with narrow, discerning eyes. "So
why did you chase him away?"
Cett leaned back.
"I tried to turn him. He refused. I figured killing him would be
preferable to letting him return to you. But, he's remarkably agile
for a man his size."
If Cett really
is Mistborn, there's no way Breeze got away without Cett letting him,
Vin thought.
"So you see,
Venture," Cett said. "I know you. I know you better,
perhaps, than you know yourself—for I know what your friends
think of you. It takes a pretty extraordinary man to earn the loyalty
of a weasel like Breeze."
"So you think
I won't harm your daughter," Elend said.
"I know
you won't," Cett said. "You're honest—I happen to
like that about you. Unfortunately, honesty is very easy to exploit—I
knew, for instance, that you'd admit Breeze was Soothing that crowd."
Cett shook his head. "Honest men weren't meant to be kings, lad.
It's a damn shame, but it's true. That's why I have to take the
throne from you."
Elend was silent
for a moment. Finally, he looked to Vin. She took his plate, sniffing
it with an Allomancer's senses.
Cett laughed.
"Think I'd poison you?"
"No,
actually," Elend said as Vin set the plate down. She wasn't as
good as some, but she'd leaned the obvious scents.
"You wouldn't
use poison," Elend said. "That isn't your way. You seem to
be a rather honest man yourself."
"I'm just
blunt," Cett said. "There's a difference."
"I haven't
heard you tell a lie yet."
"That's
because you don't know me well enough to discern the lies," Cett
said. He held up several grease-stained fingers. "I've already
told you three lies tonight, lad. Good luck guessing which ones they
were."
Elend paused,
studying Cett. "You're playing with me."
"Of course I
am!" Cett said. "Don't you see, boy? This is why you
shouldn't be king. Leave the job to men who understand their own
corruption; don't let it destroy you."
"Why do you
care?" Elend asked.
"Because I'd
rather not kill you," Cett said.
"Then don't."
Cett shook his
head. "That isn't how all this works, lad. If there is an
opportunity to stabilize your power, or to get more power, you'd damn
well better take it. And I will."
The table fell
silent again. Cett eyed Vin. "No comments from the Mistborn?"
"You swear a
lot," Vin said. "You're not supposed to do that in front of
ladies."
Cett laughed.
"That's the funny thing about Luthadel, lass. They're all so
concerned about doing what is 'proper' when people can see them—but,
at the same time, they find nothing wrong with going and raping a
couple skaa women when the party is through. At least I swear
to your face."
Elend still hadn't
touched his food. "What will happen if you win the vote for the
throne?"
Cett shrugged.
"Honest answer?"
"Always."
"First thing,
I'd have you assassinated," Cett said. "Can't have old
kings sticking around."
"And if I step
down?" Elend said. "Withdraw from the vote?"
"Step down,"
Cett said, "vote for me, and then leave town, and I'll let you
live."
"And the
Assembly?" Elend asked.
"Dissolved,"
Cett said. "They're a liability. Any time you give a committee
power, you just end up with confusion."
"The Assembly
gives the people power," Elend said. "That's what a
government should provide."
Surprisingly, Cett
didn't laugh at that comment. Instead, he leaned in again, setting
one arm on the table, discarding a half-eaten drumstick. "That's
the thing, boy. Letting the people rule themselves is fine when
everything is bright and happy, but what about when you have two
armies facing you? What about when there's a band of insane koloss
destroying villages on your frontier? Those aren't the times when you
can afford to have an Assembly around to depose you." Cett shook
his head. "The price is too high. When you can't have both
freedom and safety, boy, which do you choose?"
Elend was silent.
"I make my own choice," he finally said. "And I leave
the others to make their own as well."
Cett smiled, as if
he'd expected such a reply. He started in on another drumstick.
"Let's say I
leave," Elend said. "And let's say you do get the throne,
protect the city, and dissolve the Assembly. What then? What of the
people?"
"Why do you
care?"
"You need
ask?" Elend said. "I thought you 'understood' me."
Cett smiled. "I
put the skaa back to work, in the way the Lord Ruler did. No pay, no
emancipated peasant class."
"I can't
accept that," Elend said.
"Why not?"
Cett said. "It's what they want. You gave them a choice—and
they chose to throw you out. Now they're going to choose to put me on
the throne. They know that the Lord Ruler's way was the best. One
group must rule, and another must serve. Someone has to grow the food
and work the forges, boy."
"Perhaps,"
Elend said. "But you're wrong about one thing."
"And what is
that?"
"They're not
going to vote for you," Elend said, standing. "They're
going to choose me. Faced with the choice between freedom and
slavery, they will choose freedom. The men of the Assembly are the
finest of this city, and they will make the best choice for its
people."
Cett paused, then
he laughed. "The best thing about you, lad, is that you can say
that and sound serious!"
"I'm leaving,
Cett," Elend said, nodding to Vin.
"Oh, sit down,
Venture," Cett said, waving toward Elend's chair. "Don't
act indignant because I'm being honest with you. We still have things
to discuss."
"Such as?"
Elend asked.
"Atium,"
Cett said.
Elend stood for a
moment, apparently forcing down his annoyance. When Cett didn't speak
immediately, Elend finally sat and began to eat. Vin just picked
quietly at her food. As she did, however, she studied the faces of
Cett's soldiers and servants. There were bound to be Allomancers
mixed among them—finding out how many could give Elend an
advantage.
"Your people
are starving," Cett said. "And, if my spies are worth their
coin, you just got another influx of mouths. You can't last much
longer under this siege."
"And?"
Elend asked.
"I have food,"
Cett said. "A lot of it—more than my army needs. Canned
goods, packed with the new method the Lord Ruler developed.
Long-lasting, no spoilage. Really a marvel of technology. I'd be
willing to trade you some of them . . . ."
Elend paused, fork
halfway to his lips. Then he lowered it and laughed. "You still
think I have the Lord Ruler's atium?"
"Of course you
have it," Cett said, frowning. "Where else would it be?"
Elend shook his
head, taking a bite of gravy-drenched potato. "Not here, for
certain."
"But . . . the
rumors . . . " Cett said.
"Breeze spread
those rumors," Elend said. "I thought you'd figured out why
he joined your group. He wanted you to come to Luthadel so that you'd
stop Straff from taking the city."
"But, Breeze
did everything he could to keep me from coming here,"
Cett said. "He downplayed the rumors, he tried to distract me,
he . . . " Cett trailed off, then he bellowed a laugh. "I
thought he was just there to spy! It seems we both underestimated
each other."
"My people
could still use that food," Elend said.
"And they'll
have it—assuming I become king."
"They're
starving now," Elend said.
"And their
suffering will be your burden," Cett said, his face growing
hard. "I can see that you have judged me, Elend Venture. You
think me a good man. You're wrong. Honesty does not make a man less
of a tyrant. I slaughtered thousands to secure my rule. I put burdens
on the skaa that make even the Lord Ruler's hand seem pleasant. I
made certain that I stayed in power. I will do the same here."
The men fell
silent. Elend ate, but Vin only mixed her food around. If she had
missed a poison, she wanted one of them to remain alert. She still
wanted to find those Allomancers, and there was only one way to be
certain. She turned off her copper, then burned bronze.
There was no
Coppercloud burning; Cett apparently didn't care if someone
recognized his men as Allomancers. Two of his men were burning
pewter. Neither, however, were soldiers; both were pretending to be
members of the serving staff who were bringing meals. There was also
a Tineye pulsing in the other room, listening.
Why hide Thugs as
servants, then use no copper to hide their pulses? In addition, there
were no Soothers or Rioters. Nobody was trying to influence Elend's
emotions. Neither Cett nor his youthful attendant were burning any
metals. Either they weren't actually Allomancers, or they feared
exposing themselves. Just to be certain, Vin flared her bronze,
seeking to pierce any hidden copperclouds that might be nearby. She
could see Cett putting out some obvious Allomancers as a distraction,
then hiding the others inside a cloud.
She found nothing.
Finally satisfied, she returned to picking at her meal. How many
times has this ability of mine—the ability to pierce
copperclouds—proven useful? She'd forgotten what it was
like to be blocked from sensing Allomantic pulses. This one little
ability—simple though it seemed—provided an enormous
advantage. And the Lord Ruler and his Inquisitors had probably been
able to do it from the beginning. What other tricks was she missing,
what other secrets had died with the Lord Ruler?
He knew the
truth about the Deepness, Vin thought. He must have. He tried
to warn us, at the end . . . .
Elend and Cett were
talking again. Why couldn't she focus on the problems of the city?
"So you don't
have any atium at all?" Cett said.
"None that
we're willing to sell," Elend said.
"You've
searched the city?" Cett asked.
"A dozen
times."
"The statues,"
Cett said. "Perhaps the Lord Ruler hid the metal by melting it
down, then building things out of it."
Elend shook his
head. "We thought of that. The statues aren't atium, and they
aren't hollow either—that would have been a good place to hide
metal from Allomancer eyes. We thought maybe that it would be hidden
in the palace somewhere, but even the spires are simple iron."
"Caves,
tunnels . . . ."
"None that we
can find," Elend said. "We've had Allomancers patrol,
searching for large sources of metals. We've done everything we can
think of, Cett, short of tearing holes in the ground. Trust me. We've
been working on this problem for a while."
Cett nodded,
sighing. "So, I suppose holding you for ransom would be
pointless?"
Elend smiled. "I'm
not even king, Cett. The only thing you'd do is make the Assembly
less likely to vote for you."
Cett laughed.
"Suppose I'll have to let you go, then."
Alendi was never
the Hero of Ages. At best, I have amplified his virtues, creating a
Hero where there was none. At worst, I fear that all we believe may
have been corrupted.





36
ONCE THIS WAREHOUSE
HAD HELD swords and armor, scattered across its floor in heaps, like
some mythical treasure. Sazed remembered walking through it,
marveling at the preparations Kelsier had made without alerting any
of his crewmembers. Those weapons had armed the rebellion on the eve
of the Survivor's own death, letting it take the city.
Those weapons were
now stored in lockers and armories. In their place, a desperate,
beaten people huddled in what blankets they could find. There were
very few men, none of fighting quality; Straff had pressed those into
his army. These others—the weak, the sickly, the wounded—he
had allowed to Luthadel, knowing that Elend wouldn't turn them away.
Sazed moved among
them, offering what comfort he could. They had no furniture, and even
changes of clothing were becoming scarce in the city. The merchants,
realizing that warmth would be a premium for the upcoming winter, had
begun raising prices on all their wares, not just foodstuffs.
Sazed knelt beside
a crying woman. "Peace, Genedere," he said, his coppermind
reminding him of her name.
She shook her head.
She had lost three children in the koloss attack, two more in the
flight to Luthadel. Now the final one—the babe she had carried
the entire way—was sick. Sazed took the child from her arms,
carefully studying his symptoms. Little had changed from the day
before.
"Is there
hope, Master Terrisman?" Genedere asked.
Sazed glanced down
at the thin, glassy-eyed baby. The chances were not good. How could
he tell her such a thing?
"As long as he
breathes, there is hope, dear woman," Sazed said. "I will
ask the king to increase your portion of food—you need strength
to give suck. You must keep him warm. Stay near the fires, and
use a damp cloth to drip water in his mouth even when he is not
eating. He has great need of liquids."
Genedere nodded
dully, taking back the baby. How Sazed wished he could give her more.
A dozen different religions passed through his mind. He had spent his
entire life trying to encourage people to believe in something other
than the Lord Ruler. Yet, for some reason, at this moment he found it
difficult to preach one of them to Genedere.
It had been
different before the Collapse. Each time he'd spoken of a religion,
Sazed had felt a subtle sense of rebellion. Even if people hadn't
accepted the things he taught—and they rarely had—his
words had reminded them that there had once been beliefs other than
the doctrines of the Steel Ministry.
Now there was
nothing to rebel against. In the face of the terrible grief he saw in
Genedere's eyes, he found it difficult to speak of religions long
dead, gods long forgotten. Esoterica would not ease this woman's
pain.
Sazed stood, moving
on to the next group of people.
"Sazed?"
Sazed turned. He
hadn't noticed Tindwyl entering the warehouse. The doors of the large
structure were closed against approaching night, and the firepits
gave an inconsistent light. Holes had been knocked in the roof to let
out the smoke; if one looked up, trails of mist could be seen
creeping into the room, though they evaporated before they reached
halfway to the floor.
The refugees didn't
often look up.
"You've been
here nearly all day," Tindwyl said. The room was remarkably
quiet, considering its occupancy. Fires crackled, and people lay
silent in their pain or numbness.
"There are
many wounded here," Sazed said. "I am the best one to look
after them, I think. I am not alone—the king has sent others
and Lord Breeze is here, Soothing the people's despair."
Sazed nodded to the
side, where Breeze sat in a chair, ostensibly reading a book. He
looked terribly out of place in the room, wearing his fine
three-piece suit. Yet, his mere presence said something remarkable,
in Sazed's estimation.
These poor
people, Sazed thought. Their lives were terrible under the
Lord Ruler. Now even what little they had has been taken from them.
And they were only a tiny number—four hundred compared with the
hundreds of thousands who still lived in Luthadel.
What would happen
when the final stores of food ran out? Rumors were already abroad
regarding the poisoned wells, and Sazed had just heard that some of
their stored food had been sabotaged as well. What would happen to
these people? How long could the siege continue?
In fact, what would
happen when the siege ended? What would happen when the armies
finally began to attack and pillage? What destruction, what grief,
would the soldiers cause in searching for hidden atium?
"You do care
for them," Tindwyl said quietly, stepping up.
Sazed turned toward
her. Then he looked down. "Not as much as I should, perhaps."
"No,"
Tindwyl said. "I can see it. You confuse me, Sazed."
"I seem to
have a talent in that area."
"You look
tired. Where is your bronzemind?"
Suddenly, Sazed
felt the fatigue. He'd been ignoring it, but her words seemed to
bring it in like a wave, rolling over him.
He sighed. "I
used most of my wakefulness in my run to Luthadel. I was so eager to
get here . . . ." His studies had languished recently. With the
problems in the city, and the arrival of the refugees, he hadn't had
much time. Besides, he had already transcribed the rubbing. Further
work would require detailed cross-referencing to other works,
searching for clues. He probably wouldn't even have time to . . .
He frowned, noting
the odd look in Tindwyl's eyes.
"All right,"
she said, sighing. "Show me."
"Show you?"
"Whatever it
was you found," she said. "The discovery that prompted you
to run across two dominances. Show it to me."
Suddenly,
everything seemed to lighten. His fatigue, his worry, even his
sorrow. "I would love to," he said quietly.
Another job well
done, Breeze thought, congratulating himself as he watched the
two Terrismen leave the warehouse.
Most people, even
noblemen, misunderstood Soothing. They thought of it as some kind of
mind control, and even those who knew more presumed that Soothing was
an invasive, terrible thing.
Breeze had never
seen it that way. Soothing wasn't invasive. If it was, then ordinary
interaction with another person was comparably invasive. Soothing,
when done right, was no more a violation of another person than it
was for a woman to wear a low-cut gown or speak in a commanding
voice. All three produced common, understandable, and—most
important—natural reactions in people.
Take Sazed, for
example. Was it "invasive" to make the man less fatigued,
so he could better go about his ministrations? Was it wrong to Soothe
away his pain—just a bit—thereby making him better able
to cope with the suffering?
Tindwyl was an even
better example. Perhaps some would call Breeze a meddler for Soothing
her sense of responsibility, and her disappointment, when she saw
Sazed. But, Breeze had not created the emotions that the
disappointment had been overshadowing. Emotions like curiosity.
Respect. Love.
No, if Soothing
were simple "mind control," Tindwyl would have turned away
from Sazed as soon as the two left Breeze's area of influence. But
Breeze knew that she wouldn't. A crucial decision had been made, and
Breeze had not made that decision for her. The moment had been
building for weeks; it would have occurred with or without Breeze.
He had just helped
it happen sooner.
Smiling to himself,
Breeze checked his pocket watch. He still had a few more minutes, and
he settled back in his chair, sending out a general Soothing wave,
lessening people's grief and pain. Focusing on so many at once, he
couldn't be very specific; some would find themselves made a little
emotionally numb as he Pushed too strongly against them. But, it
would be good for the group as a whole.
He didn't read his
book; in truth, he couldn't understand how Elend and the rest spent
so much time with them. Dreadfully boring things. Breeze could only
see himself reading if there were no people around. Instead, he went
back to what he'd been doing before Sazed had drawn his attention. He
studied the refugees, trying to decide what each one was feeling.
This was the other
great misunderstanding about Soothing. Allomancy wasn't nearly as
important as observational talent. True, having a subtle touch
certainly helped. However, Soothing didn't give an Allomancer the
ability to know someone's feelings. Those, Breeze had to guess on his
own.
It all came back to
what was natural. Even the most inexperienced skaa would realize they
were being Soothed if unexpected emotions began bouncing around
inside of them. True subtlety in Soothing was about encouraging
natural emotions, all done by carefully making the right other
emotions less powerful. People were a patchwork of feelings; usually,
what they thought they were "feeling" at the moment only
related to which emotions were currently most dominant within them.
The careful Soother
saw what was beneath the surface. He understood what a man was
feeling, even when that man himself didn't understand—or
acknowledge—those emotions. Such was the case with Sazed and
Tindwyl.
Odd pair, that
one, Breeze thought to himself, idly Soothing one of the skaa to
make him more relaxed as he tried to sleep. The rest of the crew
is convinced that those two are enemies. But, hatred rarely creates
that measure of bitterness and frustration. No, those two emotions
come from an entirely different set of problems.
Of course, isn't
Sazed supposed to be a eunuch? I wonder how this all came about .
. . .
His speculations
trailed off as the warehouse doors opened. Elend walked in—Ham,
unfortunately, accompanying him. Elend was wearing one of his white
uniforms, complete with white gloves and a sword. The white was an
important symbol; with all of the ash and soot in the city, a man in
white was quite striking. Elend's uniforms had to been crafted of
special fabrics designed to be resistant to ash, and they still had
to be scrubbed every day. The effect was worth the effort.
Breeze immediately
picked at Elend's emotions, making the man less tired, less
uncertain—though the second was becoming almost unnecessary.
That was partially the Terriswoman's doing; Breeze had been impressed
with her ability to change how people felt, considering her lack of
Allomancy.
Breeze left Elend's
emotions of disgust and pity; both were appropriate considering the
environment. He did, however, give Ham a nudge to make him less
argumentative; Breeze wasn't in a mood to deal with the man's
prattlings at the moment.
He stood as the two
men approached. People perked up as they saw Elend, his presence
somehow bringing them a hope that Breeze couldn't emulate with
Allomancy. They whispered, calling Elend King.
"Breeze,"
Elend said, nodding. "Is Sazed here?"
"He just left,
I'm afraid," Breeze said.
Elend seemed
distracted. "Ah, well," he said. "I'll find him
later." Elend looked around the room, lips downturned. "Ham,
tomorrow, I want you to round up the clothing merchants on Kenton
Street and bring them here to see this."
"They might
not like that, Elend," Ham said.
"I hope they
don't," Elend said. "But we'll see how they feel about
their prices once they visit this room. I can understand food's
expense, considering its scarcity. However, there is no reason but
greed to deny the people clothing."
Ham nodded, but
Breeze could see the reticence in his posture. Did the others realize
how strangely nonconfrontational Ham was? He liked to argue with
friends, but he rarely actually came to any conclusions in his
philosophizing. Plus, he absolutely hated fighting with strangers;
Breeze had always found that an odd attribute in one who was hired,
essentially, to hit people. He gave Ham a bit of a Soothing to make
him less worried about confronting the merchants.
"You aren't
going to stay here all night, are you, Breeze?" Elend asked.
"Lord Ruler,
no!" Breeze said. "My dear man, you're lucky you managed to
get me to come at all. Honestly, this is no place for a gentleman.
The dirt, the depressing atmosphere—and that's not even making
mention of the smell!"
Ham frowned.
"Breeze, someday you're going to have to learn to think about
other people."
"As long as I
can think about them from a distance, Hammond, I shall be happy to
engage in the activity."
Ham shook his head.
"You're hopeless."
"Are you
heading back to the palace then?" Elend asked.
"Yes,
actually," Breeze said, checking his pocket watch.
"Do you need a
ride?"
"I brought my
own carriage," Breeze said.
Elend nodded, then
turned to Ham, and the two retreated the way they had come, talking
about Elend's next meeting with one of the other Assemblymen.
Breeze wandered
into the palace a short time later. He nodded to the door guards,
Soothing away their mental fatigue. They perked up in response,
watching the mists with renewed vigilance. It wouldn't last long, but
little touches like that were second nature to Breeze.
It was getting
late, and few people were in the hallways. He made his way through
the kitchens, Nudging the scullery maids to make them more chatty. It
would make their cleaning pass more quickly. Beyond the kitchens he
found a small stone room, lit by a couple of plain lamps, set with a
small table. It was one of the palace's boothlike, solitary dining
rooms.
Clubs sat in one
corner of the booth, gimped leg stretched out on the bench. He eyed
Breeze with a scowl. "You're late."
"You're
early," Breeze said, sliding into the bench across from Clubs.
"Same thing,"
Clubs grumbled.
There was a second
cup on the table, along with a bottle of wine. Breeze unbuttoned his
vest, sighed quietly, and poured himself a cup as he leaned back with
his legs up on his bench.
Clubs sipped his
wine.
"You have your
cloud up?" Breeze asked.
"Around you?"
Clubs said. "Always."
Breeze smiled,
taking a sip, and relaxed. Though he rarely had opportunities to use
his powers anymore, Clubs was a Smoker. When he was burning copper,
every Allomancer's abilities were invisible to those burning bronze.
But more important—at least to Breeze—burning copper made
Clubs immune to any form of emotional Allomancy.
"Don't see why
that makes you so happy," Clubs said. "I thought you liked
playing with emotions."
"I do,"
Breeze said.
"Then why come
drink with me every night?" Clubs asked.
"You mind the
company?"
Clubs didn't
answer. That was pretty much his way of saying he didn't mind. Breeze
eyed the grumpy general. Most of the other crewmembers stayed away
from Clubs; Kelsier had brought him in at the last moment, since the
Coppercloud they usually used had died.
"Do you know
what it's like, Clubs?" Breeze asked. "Being a Soother?"
"No."
"It gives you
remarkable control. It's a wonderful feeling, being able to influence
those around you, always feeling like you have a handle on how people
will react."
"Sounds
delightful," Clubs said flatly.
"And yet, it
does things to you. I spend most of my time watching people—tweaking,
Nudging, and Soothing. That's changed me. I don't . . . look at
people the same way. It's hard to just be friends with someone when
you see them as something to be influenced and changed."
Clubs grunted. "So
that's why we never used to see you with women."
Breeze nodded. "I
can't help it anymore. I always touch the emotions of everyone around
me. And so, when a woman comes to love me . . . " He liked to
think he wasn't invasive. Yet, how could he trust anyone who said
they loved him? Was it he, or his Allomancy, that they responded to?
Clubs filled his
cup. "You're a lot sillier than you act."
Breeze smiled.
Clubs was one of the few people who was completely immune to his
touch. Emotional Allomancy wouldn't work on him, and he was always
completely forthcoming with his emotions: everything made him grumpy.
Manipulating him through non-Allomantic means had proven to be a
fruitless waste of time.
Breeze regarded his
wine. "The amusing thing is, you almost didn't join the crew
because of me."
"Damn
Soothers," Clubs muttered.
"But you're
immune to us."
"To your
Allomancy, maybe," Clubs said. "But that isn't the only way
you people do things. A man always has to watch himself around
Soothers."
"Then why let
me join you every evening for wine?"
Clubs was silent
for a moment, and Breeze almost thought he wasn't going to respond.
Finally, Clubs muttered, "You're not as bad as most."
Breeze took a gulp
of wine. "That is as honest a compliment as I think I've ever
received."
"Don't let it
ruin you," Clubs said.
"Oh, I think
I'm too late for ruining," Breeze said, topping off his cup.
"This crew . . . Kell's plan . . . has already done a thorough
job of that."
Clubs nodded in
agreement.
"What happened
to us, Clubs?" Breeze asked. "I joined Kell for the
challenge. I never did know why you joined."
"Money."
Breeze nodded. "His
plan fell apart, his army got destroyed, and we stayed. Then he died,
and we still stayed. This blasted kingdom of Elend's is
doomed, you know."
"We won't last
another month," Clubs said. It wasn't idle pessimism; Breeze
knew people well enough to tell when they were serious.
"And yet, here
we are," Breeze said. "I spent all day making skaa feel
better about the fact that their families had been slaughtered. You
spent all day training soldiers that—with or without your
help—will barely last a few heartbeats against a determined
foe. We follow a boy of a king who doesn't seem to have a shade of a
clue just how bad his predicament is. Why?"
Clubs shook his
head. "Kelsier. Gave us a city, made us think we were
responsible for protecting it."
"But we aren't
that kind of people," Breeze said. "We're thieves and
scammers. We shouldn't care. I mean . . . I've gotten so bad that I
Soothe scullery maids so that they'll have a happier time at work! I
might as well start dressing in pink and carrying around flowers. I
could probably make quite a bundle at weddings."
Clubs snorted. Then
he raised his cup. "To the Survivor," he said. "May he
be damned for knowing us better than we knew ourselves."
Breeze raised his
own cup. "Damn him," he agreed quietly.
The two fell
silent. Talking to Clubs tended to turn into . . . well, not talking.
However, Breeze felt a simple contentment. Soothing was wonderful; it
made him who he was. But it was also work. Even birds couldn't fly
all the time.
"There
you are."
Breeze snapped his
eyes open. Allrianne stood at the entrance to the room, just at the
edge of the table. She wore light blue; where had she gotten so many
dresses? Her makeup was, of course, immaculate—and there was a
bow in her hair. That long blond hair—common in the West but
almost unheard of in the Central Dominance—and that perky,
inviting figure.
Desire immediately
blossomed inside of him. No! Breeze thought. She's half
your age. You're a dirty old man. Dirty! "Allrianne,"
he said uncomfortably, "shouldn't you be in bed or something?"
She rolled her
eyes, shooing his legs out of the way so she could sit on the bench
beside him. "It's only nine o'clock, Breeze. I'm eighteen, not
ten."
You might as
well be, he thought, looking away from her, trying to focus on
something else. He knew that he should be stronger, shouldn't let the
girl get near him, but he did nothing as she slid up to him and took
a drink from his cup.
He sighed, putting
his arm around her shoulders. Clubs just shook his head, the hint of
a smile on his lips.
"Well,"
Vin said quietly, "that answers one question."
"Mistress?"
OreSeur said, sitting across the table from her in the dark room.
With her Allomancer's ears, she could hear exactly what was going on
in the next boothlike room over.
"Allrianne is
an Allomancer," Vin said.
"Really?"
Vin nodded. "She's
been Rioting Breeze's emotions ever since she arrived, making him
more attracted to her."
"One would
think that he'd notice," OreSeur said.
"You'd think,"
Vin said. She probably shouldn't feel as amused as she did. The girl
could be a Mistborn—though the idea of that puff flying through
the mists seemed ridiculous.
Which is
probably exactly how she wants me to think, Vin thought. I
have to remember Kliss and Shan—neither one of them turned out
to be the person I thought they were.
"Breeze
probably just doesn't think his emotions are unnatural," Vin
said. "He must be attracted to her already."
OreSeur closed his
mouth and cocked his head—his dog's version of a frown.
"I know,"
Vin agreed. "But, at least we know he isn't the one using
Allomancy to seduce her. Either way, that's irrelevant. Clubs
isn't the kandra."
"How could you
possibly know that, Mistress?"
Vin paused. Clubs
always turned his copper on around Breeze; it was one of the few
times he used it. However, it was difficult to tell if someone was
burning copper. After all, if they turned on their metal, they hid
themselves by default.
But Vin could
pierce copperclouds. She could sense Allrianne's Rioting; she could
even sense a faint thumping coming from Clubs himself, copper's own
Allomantic pulse, something that Vin suspected few people beyond
herself and the Lord Ruler had ever heard.
"I just know,"
Vin said.
"If you say
so, Mistress," OreSeur said. "But . . . didn't you already
decide the spy was Demoux?"
"I wanted to
check Clubs anyway," she said. "Before I did anything
drastic."
"Drastic?"
Vin sat quietly for
a moment. She didn't have much proof, but she did have her
instincts—and those instincts told her Demoux was the spy. That
sneaking way he'd gone out the other night . . . the obvious logic of
choosing him . . . it all fit.
She stood. Things
were getting too dangerous, too sensitive. She couldn't ignore it any
longer. "Come on," she said, leaving the booth behind.
"It's time to put Demoux in prison."
"What do you
mean you lost him?" Vin asked, standing outside the door
to Demoux's room.
The servant
flushed. "My lady, I'm sorry. I watched him, like you told
me—but he went out on patrol. Should I have followed? I mean,
don't you think that would have looked suspicious?"
Vin cursed quietly
to herself. She knew that she didn't have much right to be angry,
however. I should have told Ham straight off, she thought with
frustration.
"My lady, he
only left a few minutes ago," the servant said.
Vin glanced at
OreSeur, then took off down the corridor. As soon as they reached a
window, Vin leaped out into the dark night, OreSeur following behind
her, dropping the short distance to the courtyard.
Last time, I saw
him come back in through the gates to the palace grounds, she
thought, running through the mist. She found a couple of soldiers
there, guarding.
"Did Captain
Demoux come this way?" she demanded, bursting into their ring of
torchlight.
They perked up, at
first shocked, then confused.
"Lady Heir?"
one of them said. "Yes, he just went out, on patrol just a
minute or two ago."
"By himself?"
Vin asked.
They nodded.
"Isn't that a
little odd?"
They shrugged. "He
goes by himself sometimes," one said. "We don't question.
He's our superior, after all."
"Which way?"
Vin demanded.
One pointed, and
Vin took off, OreSeur at her side. I should have watched better. I
should have hired real spies to keep an eye on him. I should have—
She froze. Up
ahead, walking down a quite street in the mists, was a figure,
walking into the city. Demoux.
Vin dropped a coin
and threw herself into the air, passing far over his head, landing on
top of a building. He continued, oblivious. Demoux or kandra, neither
would have Allomantic powers.
Vin paused, daggers
out, ready to spring. But . . . she still didn't have any real proof.
The part of her that Kelsier had transformed, the part that had come
to trust, thought of the Demoux she knew.
Do I really
believe he's the kandra? she thought. Or do I just want
him to be the kandra, so that I don't have to suspect my real
friends?
He continued to
walk below, her tin-enhanced ears easily picking out his footfalls.
Behind, OreSeur scrambled up onto the top of the roof, then padded
over and sat down beside her.
I can't just
attack, she thought. I need to at least watch, see where he's
going. Get proof. Perhaps learn something in the process.
She waved to
OreSeur, and they quietly followed along the rooftops, trailing
Demoux. Soon, Vin noticed something odd—a flicker of firelight
illuminating the mists a few streets over, making haunted shadows of
buildings. Vin glanced at Demoux, trailing him with her eyes as he
wandered down an alleyway, moving toward the illumination.
What . . . ?
Vin threw herself
off the roof. It took only three bounds for her to reach the source
of the light. A modest bonfire crackled in the center of a small
square. Skaa huddled around it for warmth, looking a little
frightened in the mists. Vin was surprised to see them. She hadn't
seen skaa go out in the mists since the night of the Collapse.
Demoux approached
down a side street, greeting several of the others. In the firelight
she could confirm for certain that it was him—or, at least, a
kandra with his face.
There were,
perhaps, two hundred people in the square. Demoux moved as if to sit
on the cobblestones, but someone quickly approached with a chair. A
young woman brought him a mug of something steaming, which he
received gratefully.
Vin leaped to a
rooftop, staying low to keep from being exposed by the firelight.
More skaa arrived, mostly in groups, but some brave individuals came
alone.
A sound came from
behind her, and Vin turned as OreSeur—apparently having barely
made the jump—scrambled the last few feet over the edge onto
the roof. He glanced down at the street below, shook his head, then
padded over to join her. She raised a finger to her lips, nodding
down at the growing group of people. OreSeur cocked his head at the
sight, but said nothing.
Finally, Demoux
stood, holding the still steaming cup in his hands. People gathered
around, sitting on the cold cobblestones, huddled beneath blankets or
cloaks.
"We shouldn't
fear the mists, my friends," Demoux said. His wasn't the voice
of a strong leader or forceful battle commander—it was the
voice of hardened youth, a little hesitant, but compelling
nonetheless.
"The Survivor
taught us of this," he continued. "I know it's very hard to
think of the mists without remembering stories of mistwraiths or
other horrors. But, the Survivor gave the mists to us. We should try
and remember him, through them."
Lord Ruler .
. . Vin thought with shock. He's one of them—a member of the
Church of the Survivor! She wavered, uncertain what to think. Was
he the kandra or wasn't he? Why would the kandra meet with a group of
people like this? But . . . why would Demoux himself do it?
"I know it's
hard," Demoux said below, "without the Survivor. I know
you're afraid of the armies. Trust me, I know. I see them too. I know
you suffer beneath this siege. I . . . don't know if I can even tell
you not to worry. The Survivor himself knew great hardship—the
death of his wife, his imprisonment in the Pits of Hathsin. But he
survived. That's the point, isn't it? We have to live on, no matter
how hard this all gets. We'll win, in the end. Just like he did."
He stood with his
mug in his hands, looking nothing like the skaa preachers Vin had
seen. Kelsier had chosen a passionate man to found his religion—or,
more precisely, to found the revolution the religion had come from.
Kelsier had needed leaders who could enflame supporters, whip them up
into a destructive upheaval.
Demoux was
something different. He didn't shout, but spoke calmly. Yet, people
paid attention. They sat on the stones around him, looking up with
hopeful—even worshipful—eyes.
"The Lady
Heir," one of them whispered. "What of her?"
"Lady Vin
bears a great responsibility," Demoux said. "You can see
the weight bowing her down, and how frustrated she is with the
problems in the city. She is a straightforward woman, and I don't
think she likes the Assembly's politicking."
"But, she'll
protect us, right?" one asked.
"Yes,"
Demoux said. "Yes, I believe she will. Sometimes, I think that
she's even more powerful than the Survivor was. You know that he only
had two years to practice as a Mistborn? She's barely had that much
time herself."
Vin turned away. It
comes back to that, she thought. They sound rational until
they talk about me, and then . . .
"She'll bring
us peace, someday," Demoux said. "The heir will bring back
the sun, stop the ash from falling. But we have to survive until
then. And we have to fight. The Survivor's entire work was to see the
Lord Ruler dead and make us free. What gratitude do we show if we run
now that armies have come?
"Go and tell
your Assemblymen that you don't want Lord Cett, or even Lord Penrod,
to be your king. The vote happens in one day, and we need to
make certain the right man is made king. The Survivor chose Elend
Venture, and that is whom we must follow."
That's new,
Vin thought.
"Lord Elend is
weak," one of the people said. "He won't defend us."
"Lady Vin
loves him," Demoux said. "She wouldn't love a weak man.
Penrod and Cett treat you like the skaa used to be treated,
and that's why you think they're strong. But that's not strength—it's
oppression. We have to be better than that! We have to trust the
Survivor's judgment!"
Vin relaxed against
the lip of the roof, tension melting a bit. If Demoux really was the
spy, then he wasn't going to give her any evidence this night. So,
she put her knives away, then rested with her arms folded on the
rooftop's edge. The fire crackled in the cool winter evening, sending
billows of smoke to mix with the mists, and Demoux continued to speak
in his quiet, reassuring voice, teaching the people about Kelsier.
It's not even
really a religion, Vin thought as she listened. The theology
is so simple—not at all like the complex beliefs that Sazed
speaks about.
Demoux taught basic
concepts. He held up Kelsier as a model, talking about survival, and
about enduring hardships. Vin could see why the direct words would
appeal to the skaa. The people really only had two choices: to
struggle on, or to give up. Demoux's teachings gave them an excuse to
keep living.
The skaa didn't
need rituals, prayers, or codes. Not yet. They were too inexperienced
with religion in general, too frightened of it, to want such things.
But, the more she listened, the more Vin understood the Church of the
Survivor. It was what they needed; it took what the skaa already
knew—a life filled with hardship—and elevated it to a
higher, more optimistic plane.
And the teachings
were still evolving. The deification of Kelsier she had expected;
even the reverence for her was understandable. But, where did Demoux
get the promises that Vin would stop the ash and bring back the sun?
How did he know to preach of green grasses and blue skies, describing
the world as it was known only in some of the world's most obscure
texts?
He described a
strange world of colors and beauty—a place foreign and
difficult to conceive, but somehow wonderful all the same. Flowers
and green plants were strange, alien things to these people; even Vin
had trouble visualizing them, and she had heard Sazed's descriptions.
Demoux was giving
the skaa a paradise. It had to be something completely removed from
normal experience, for the mundane world was not a place of hope. Not
with a foodless winter approaching, not with armies threatening and
the government in turmoil.
Vin pulled back as
Demoux finally ended the meeting. She lay for a moment, trying to
decide how she felt. She'd been near certain about Demoux, but now
her suspicions seemed unfounded. He'd gone out at night, true, but
she saw now what he was doing. Plus, he'd acted so suspiciously when
sneaking out. It seemed to her, as she reflected, that a kandra would
know how to go about things in a much more natural way.
It's not him,
she thought. Or, if it is, he's not going to be as easy to unmask
as I thought. She frowned in frustration. Finally, she just
sighed, rising, and walked to the other side of the roof. OreSeur
followed, and Vin glanced at him. "When Kelsier told you to take
his body," she said, "what did he want you to preach to
these people?"
"Mistress?"
OreSeur asked.
"He had you
appear, as if you were him returned from the grave."
"Yes."
"Well, what
did he have you say?"
OreSeur shrugged.
"Very simple things, Mistress. I told them that the time for
rebellion had arrived. I told them that I—Kelsier—had
returned to give them hope for victory."
I represent that
thing you've never been able to kill, no matter how hard you try.
They had been Kelsier's final words, spoken face-to-face with the
Lord Ruler. I am hope.
I am hope.
Was it any wonder
that this concept would become central to the church that sprang up
around him? "Did he have you teach things like we just heard
Demoux say?" Vin asked. "About the ash no longer falling,
and the sun turning yellow?"
"No,
Mistress."
"That's what I
thought," Vin said as she heard rustling on the stones below.
She glanced over the side of the building, and saw Demoux returning
to the palace.
Vin dropped to the
alleyway floor behind him. To the man's credit, he heard her, and he
spun, hand on dueling cane.
"Peace,
Captain," she said, rising.
"Lady Vin?"
he asked with surprise.
She nodded,
approaching closer so that he'd be able to see her better in the
night. Fading torchlight still lit the air from behind, swirls of
mist playing with shadows.
"I didn't know
you were a member of the Church of the Survivor," she said
softly.
He looked down.
Though he was easily two hands taller than she, he seemed to shrink a
bit before her. "I . . . I know it makes you uncomfortable. I'm
sorry."
"It's all
right," she said. "You do a good thing for the people.
Elend will appreciate hearing of your loyalty."
Demoux looked up.
"Do you have to tell him?"
"He needs to
know what the people believe, Captain. Why would you want me to keep
it quiet?"
Demoux sighed. "I
just . . . I don't want the crew to think I'm out here pandering to
the people. Ham thinks preaching about the Survivor is silly, and
Lord Breeze says the only reason to encourage the church is to make
people more pliant."
Vin regarded him in
the darkness. "You really believe, don't you?"
"Yes, my
lady."
"But you knew
Kelsier," she said. "You were with us from near the
beginning. You know he's no god."
Demoux looked up, a
bit of a challenge in his eyes. "He died to overthrow the Lord
Ruler."
"That doesn't
make him divine."
"He taught us
how to survive, to have hope."
"You survived
before," Vin said. "People had hope before Kelsier got
thrown in those pits."
"Not like we
do now," Demoux said. "Besides . . . he had power, my lady.
I felt it."
Vin paused. She
knew the story; Kelsier had used Demoux as an example to the rest of
the army in a fight with a skeptic, directing his blows with
Allomancy, making Demoux seem as if he had supernatural powers.
"Oh, I know
about Allomancy now," Demoux said. "But . . . I felt him
Pushing on my sword that day. I felt him use me, making me more than
I was. I think I can still feel him, sometimes. Strengthening my arm,
guiding my blade . . . ."
Vin frowned. "Do
you remember the first time we met?"
Demoux nodded.
"Yes. You came to the caverns where we were hiding on the day
when the army was destroyed. I was on guard duty. You know, my
lady—even then, I knew that Kelsier would come for us. I knew
that he'd come and get those of us who had been faithful and guide us
back to Luthadel."
He went to those
caves because I forced him to. He wanted to get himself killed
fighting an army on his own.
"The
destruction of the army was a test," Demoux said, looking up
into the mists. "These armies . . . the siege . . . they're just
tests. To see if we will survive or not."
"And the ash?"
Vin asked. "Where did you hear that it would stop falling?"
Demoux turned back
to her. "The Survivor taught that, didn't he?"
Vin shook her head.
"A lot of the
people are saying it," Demoux said. "It must be true. It
fits with everything else—the yellow sun, the blue sky, the
plants . . . ."
"Yes, but
where did you first hear those things?"
"I'm not sure,
my lady."
Where did you
hear that I would be the one to bring them about? she thought,
but she somehow couldn't bring herself to voice the question.
Regardless, she knew the answer: Demoux wouldn't know. Rumors were
propagating. It would be difficult indeed to trace them back to their
source now.
"Go back to
the palace," Vin said. "I have to tell Elend what I saw,
but I'll ask him not to tell the rest of the crew."
"Thank you, my
lady," Demoux said, bowing. He turned and hurried away. A second
later, Vin heard a thump from behind: OreSeur, jumping down to the
street.
She turned. "I
was sure it was him."
"Mistress?"
"The kandra,"
Vin said, turning back toward the disappearing Demoux. "I
thought I'd discovered him."
"And?"
She shook her head.
"It's like Dockson—I think Demoux knows too much to be
faking. He feels . . . real to me."
"My brethren—"
"Are quite
skilled," Vin said with a sigh. "Yes, I know. But we're not
going to arrest him. Not tonight, at least. We'll keep an eye on him,
but I just don't think it's him anymore."
OreSeur nodded.
"Come on,"
she said. "I want to check on Elend."
And so, I come
to the focus of my argument. I apologize. Even forcing my words into
steel, sitting and scratching in this frozen cave, I am prone to
ramble.





37
SAZED GLANCED AT
THE WINDOW SHUTTERS, noting the hesitant beams of light that were
beginning to shine through the cracks. Morning already? he
thought. We studied all night? It hardly seemed possible. He
had tapped no wakefulness, yet he felt more alert—more
alive—than he had in days.
Tindwyl sat in the
chair beside him. Sazed's desk was filled with loose papers, two sets
of ink and pen waiting to be used. There were no books; Keepers had
no need of such.
"Ah!"
Tindwyl said, grabbing a pen and beginning to write. She didn't look
tired either, but she had likely dipped into her bronzemind, tapping
the wakefulness stored within.
Sazed watched her
write. She almost looked young again; he hadn't seen such overt
excitement in her since she had been abandoned by the Breeders some
ten years before. On that day, her grand work finished, she had
finally joined her fellow Keepers. Sazed had been the one to present
her with the collected knowledge that had been discovered during her
thirty years of cloistered childbirth.
It hadn't taken her
long to achieve a place in the Synod. By then, however, Sazed had
been ousted from their ranks.
Tindwyl finished
writing. "The passage is from a biography of King Wednegon,"
she said. "He was one of the last leaders who resisted the Lord
Ruler in any sort of meaningful combat."
"I know who he
was," Sazed said, smiling.
She paused. "Of
course." She obviously wasn't accustomed to studying with
someone who had access to as much information as she did. She pushed
the written passage over to Sazed; even with his mental indexes and
self-notes, it would be faster for her to write out the passage than
it would be for him to try and find it within his own copperminds.
I spent a great
deal of time with the king during his final weeks, the text read.
He
seemed frustrated, as one might imagine. His soldiers could not stand
against the Conqueror's koloss, and his men had been beaten back
repeatedly ever since FellSpire. However, the king didn't blame his
soldiers. He thought that his problems came from another source:
food.
He
mentioned this idea several times during those last days. He thought
that if he'd had more food, he could have held out. In this, Wednegon
blamed the Deepness. For, though the Deepness had been defeated—or
at least weakened—its touch had depleted Darrelnai's food
stores.
His
people could not both raise food and resist the Conqueror's demon
armies. In the end, that was why they fell.
Sazed nodded
slowly. "How much of this text do we have?"
"Not much,"
Tindwyl said. "Six or seven pages. This is the only section that
mentions the Deepness."
Sazed sat quietly
for a moment, rereading the passage. Finally, he looked up at
Tindwyl. "You think Lady Vin is right, don't you? You think the
Deepness was mist."
Tindwyl nodded.
"I agree,"
Sazed said. "At the very least, what we now call 'the Deepness'
was some sort of change in the mist."
"And your
arguments from before?"
"Proven
wrong," Sazed said, setting down the paper. "By your words
and my own studies. I did not wish this to be true, Tindwyl."
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow. "You defied the Synod again to seek after something you
didn't even want to believe?"
He looked into her
eyes. "There is a difference between fearing something and
desiring it. The return of the Deepness could destroy us. I did not
want this information—but neither could I pass by the
opportunity to discover it."
Tindwyl looked
away. "I do not believe that this will destroy us, Sazed. You
have made a grand discovery, that I will admit. The writings of the
man Kwaan tell us much. Indeed, if the Deepness was the mists, then
our understanding of the Lord Ruler's Ascension has been enhanced
greatly."
"And if the
mists are growing stronger?" Sazed asked. "If, by killing
the Lord Ruler, we also destroyed whatever force was keeping the
mists chained?"
"We have no
proof that the mists are coming by day," Tindwyl said. "And
on the possibility of them killing people, we have only your hesitant
theories."
Sazed glanced away.
On the table, his fingers had smudged Tindwyl's hurriedly written
words. "That is true," he said.
Tindwyl sighed
softly in the dim room. "Why do you never defend yourself,
Sazed?"
"What defense
is there?"
"There must be
some. You apologize and ask forgiveness, but your apparent guilt
never seems to change your behavior! Do you never think that,
perhaps, if you had been more outspoken, you might be leading the
Synod? They cast you out because you refused to offer arguments on
your own behalf. You're the most contrite rebel I've ever known."
Sazed didn't
respond. He glanced to the side, seeing her concerned eyes. Beautiful
eyes. Foolish thoughts, he told himself, looking away. You've
always known that. Some things were meant for others, but never for
you.
"You were
right about the Lord Ruler, Sazed," Tindwyl said. "Perhaps
the others would have followed you if you had been just a little more
. . . insistent."
Sazed shook his
head. "I am not a man from one of your biographies, Tindwyl. I
am not even, really, a man."
"You are a
better man than they, Sazed," Tindwyl said quietly. "The
frustrating part is, I've never been able to figure out why."
They fell silent.
Sazed rose and walked to the window, opening the shutters, letting in
the light. Then he extinguished the room's lamp.
"I will leave
today," Tindwyl said.
"Leave?"
Sazed asked. "The armies might not let you pass."
"I wasn't
going to pass them, Sazed. I plan to visit them. I have given
knowledge to young Lord Venture; I need to offer the same aid to his
opponents."
"Ah,"
Sazed said. "I see. I should have realized this."
"I doubt they
will listen as he has," Tindwyl said, a hint of fondness
slipping into her voice. "Venture is a fine man."
"A fine king,"
Sazed said.
Tindwyl didn't
respond. She looked at the table, with its scattered notations, each
drawn from one or another of their copperminds, scribbled in haste,
then shown and reread.
What was this
night, then? This night of study, this night sharing thoughts and
discoveries?
She was still
beautiful. Auburn hair graying, but kept long and straight. Face
marked by a lifetime of hardship that had not broken her. And eyes .
. . keen eyes, with the knowledge and love of learning that only a
Keeper could claim.
I should not
consider these things, Sazed thought again. There is no
purpose to them. There never was. "You must go, then,"
he said, turning.
"Again, you
refuse to argue," she said.
"What would be
the point of argument? You are a wise and determined person. You must
be guided by your own conscience."
"Sometimes,
people only seem determined upon one course because they have been
offered no other options."
Sazed turned toward
her. The room was quiet, the only sounds coming from the courtyard
below. Tindwyl sat half in sunlight, her bright robes slowly growing
more illuminated as the shadows fell away. She seemed to be implying
something, something he had not expected to ever hear from her.
"I am
confused," he said, sitting back down in a slow motion. "What
of your duty as a Keeper?"
"It is
important," she admitted. "But . . . certain, occasional
exceptions must be allowed. This rubbing you found . . . well,
perhaps it merits further study before I depart."
Sazed watched her,
trying to read her eyes. What is it I feel? he wondered.
Confused? Dumbfounded?
Afraid?
"I cannot be
what you wish, Tindwyl," he said. "I am not a man."
She waved her hand
indifferently. "I have had more than enough of 'men' and
childbearing over the years, Sazed. I have done my duty to the Terris
people. I should like to stay away from them for a time, I think. A
part of me resents them, for what was done to me."
He opened his mouth
to speak, but she held up a hand. "I know, Sazed. I took that
duty upon myself, and am glad for my service. But . . . during the
years spent alone, meeting with the Keepers only on occasion, I found
it frustrating that all their planning seemed to be directed at
maintaining their status as a conquered people.
"I only ever
saw one man pushing the Synod toward active measures. While they
planned how to keep themselves hidden, one man wanted to attack.
While they decided the best ways to foil the Breeders, one man wanted
to plot the downfall of the Final Empire. When I rejoined my people,
I found that man still fighting. Alone. Condemned for fraternizing
with thieves and rebels, he quietly accepted his punishment."
She smiled. "That
man went on to free us all."
She took his hand.
Sazed sat, astonished.
"The men I
read about, Sazed," Tindwyl said quietly, "these were not
men who sat and planned the best ways to hide. They fought; they
sought victory. Sometimes, they were reckless—and other men
called them fools. Yet, when the dice were cast and the bodies
counted, they were men who changed things."
Sunlight entered
the room in full, and she sat, cupping his hand in hers. She seemed .
. . anxious. Had he ever seen that emotion in her? She was strong,
the strongest woman he knew. That couldn't possibly be apprehension
he saw in her eyes.
"Give me an
excuse, Sazed," she whispered.
"I should . .
. very much like it if you stayed," Sazed said, one hand in
hers, the other resting on the tabletop, fingers trembling slightly.
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow.
"Stay,"
Sazed said. "Please."
Tindwyl smiled.
"Very well—you have persuaded me. Let us return to our
studies, then."
Elend walked the
top of the city wall in the morning light, sword at his hip clicking
against the side of the stonework with each step.
"You almost
look like a king," a voice noted.
Elend turned as Ham
climbed the last few steps up to the wall walk. The air was brisk,
frost still crystalline in shadows on the stone. Winter was
approaching. Perhaps it had arrived. Yet, Ham wore no cloak—only
his usual vest, trousers, and sandals.
I wonder if he
even knows what it is like to be cold, Elend thought. Pewter.
Such an amazing talent.
"You say I
nearly look like a king," Elend said, turning to continue
walking along the wall as Ham joined him. "I guess Tindwyl's
clothing has done wonders for my image."
"I didn't mean
the clothing," Ham said. "I was talking about that look on
your face. How long have you been up here?"
"Hours,"
Elend said. "How did you find me?"
"The
soldiers," Ham said. "They're starting to see you as a
commander, Elend. They watch where you are; they stand a little
straighter when you're around, polish their weapons if they know
you'll be stopping by."
"I thought you
didn't spend much time with them," Elend said.
"Oh, I never
said that," Ham said. "I spend lots of time with the
soldiers—I just can't be intimidating enough to be their
commander. Kelsier always wanted me to be a general—I think,
deep down, he thought that befriending people was inferior to leading
them. Perhaps he was right; men need leaders. I just don't want to be
one of them."
"I do,"
Elend said, surprised to hear himself say so.
Ham shrugged.
"That's probably a good thing. You are, after all, king."
"Kind of,"
Elend said.
"You're still
wearing the crown."
Elend nodded. "It
felt wrong to go without it. It sounds silly, I know—I only
wore it for a short time. But, people need to know that someone is
still in charge. For a few more days at least."
They continued to
walk. In the distance, Elend could see a shadow upon the land: the
third army had finally arrived in the wake of the refugees it had
sent. Their scouts weren't certain why the koloss force had taken so
long to get to Luthadel. The villagers' sad tale, however, gave some
clue.
The koloss had not
attacked Straff or Cett. They lay waiting. Apparently, Jastes had
enough control over them to keep them in check. And so they joined
the siege, another beast waiting for the opportunity to spring on
Luthadel.
When you can't
have both freedom and safety, which do you choose . . . ?
"You seem
surprised to realize that you want to be in charge," Ham said.
"I just
haven't ever voiced the desire before," Elend said. "It
sounds so arrogant, when I actually say it. I want to be king. I
don't want another man to take my place. Not Penrod, not Cett . . .
not anyone. The position is mine. This city is mine."
"I don't know
if 'arrogant' is the right word, El," Ham said. "Why do you
want to be king?"
"To protect
this people," Elend said. "To guard their safety—and
their rights. But, also to make certain that the noblemen don't end
up on the wrong end of another rebellion."
"That's not
arrogance."
"It is, Ham,"
Elend said. "But it's an understandable arrogance. I don't think
a man could lead without it. Actually, I think it's what I've been
missing through most of my reign. Arrogance."
"Self-confidence."
"A nicer word
for the same concept," Elend said. "I can do a better job
for this people than another man could. I just have to find a way to
prove that fact to them."
"You will."
"You're an
optimist, Ham," Elend said.
"So are you,"
Ham noted.
Elend smiled.
"True. But this job is changing me."
"Well, if you
want to keep the job, we should probably get back to studying. We
only have one day left."
Elend shook his
head. "I've read all I can, Ham. I will not take advantage of
the law, so there's no reason to search for loopholes, and studying
other books looking for inspiration just isn't working. I need time
to think. Time to walk . . . ."
They continued to
do so. As they did, Elend noticed something out in the distance. A
group of enemy soldiers doing something he couldn't distinguish. He
waved over one of his men.
"What is
that?" he asked.
The soldier shaded
his eyes, looking. "Looks like another skirmish between Cett's
men and Straff's, Your Majesty."
Elend raised an
eyebrow. "That happens often?"
The soldier
shrugged. "More and more often, lately. Usually the scouting
patrols run afoul of each other and get into a conflict. Leave a few
bodies behind when they retreat. Nothing big, Your Majesty."
Elend nodded,
dismissing the man. Big enough, he thought to himself. Those
armies must be as tense as we are. The soldiers can't enjoy remaining
so long in a siege, particularly with the winter weather.
They were close.
The arrival of the koloss would only cause more chaos. If he shoved
right, Straff and Cett would be pushed into a head-on battle. I
just need a little more time! he thought, continuing to walk, Ham
at his side.
Yet, first he
needed to get his throne back. Without that authority, he was
nothing—and could do nothing.
The problem gnawed
at his mind. As the walk continued, however, something distracted
him—this time, something inside the walls rather than outside
of them. Ham was right—the soldiers did stand a little
taller when Elend approached their posts. They saluted him, and he
nodded to them, walking with hand on pommel, as Tindwyl had
instructed.
If I do keep my
throne, I owe it to that woman, he thought. Of course, she'd
chastise him for that thought. She would tell him that he kept his
throne because he deserved to—because he was king. In changing
himself, he had simply used the resources at hand to overcome his
challenges.
He wasn't certain
if he'd ever be able to see things that way. But, her final lesson to
him the day before—he somehow knew that it was her last—had
taught him only one new concept: that there was no one mold for
kingship. He would not be like the kings of the past, any more than
he would be like Kelsier.
He would be Elend
Venture. His roots were in philosophy, so he would be remembered as a
scholar. He'd best use that to his advantage, or he wouldn't be
remembered at all. No kings could admit their weaknesses, but they
were certainly wise to admit their strengths.
And what are my
strengths? he thought. Why should I be the one who rules this
city, and those around it?
Yes, he was a
scholar—and an optimist, as Ham had noted. He was no master
duelist, though he was improving. He wasn't an excellent diplomat,
though his meetings with Straff and Cett proved that he could hold
his own.
What was he?
A nobleman who
loved the skaa. They'd always fascinated him, even before the
Collapse—before he'd met Vin and the others. It had been one of
his pet philosophical puzzles to try and prove them no different from
men of noble birth. It sounded idealistic, even a little prim, when
he thought about it—and, if he was truthful, much of his
interest in the skaa before the Collapse had been academic. They had
been unknown, and so they had seemed exotic and interesting.
He smiled. I
wonder what the plantation workers would have thought, had anyone
told them they were "exotic."
But then the
Collapse had come—the rebellion predicted in his books and
theories coming to life. His beliefs hadn't been able to continue as
mere academic abstractions. And he'd come to know the skaa—not
just Vin and the crew, but the workers and the servants. He'd seen
the hope beginning to grow within them. He'd seen the awakening of
self-respect, and of self-worth, in the people of the city, and it
excited him.
He would not
abandon them.
That's what I
am, Elend thought, pausing as he walked the wall. An idealist.
A melodramatic idealist who, despite his books and learning, never
did make a very good nobleman.
"What?"
Ham asked, stopping next to him.
Elend turned toward
him. "I've got an idea," he said.
This is the
problem. Though I believed in Alendi at first, I later became
suspicious. It seemed that he fit the signs, true. But, well, how can
I explain this?
Could it be that
he fit them too well?





38
HOW CAN HE POSSIBLY
LOOK so confident when I feel so nervous? Vin thought,
standing beside Elend as the Assembly Hall began to fill. They had
arrived early; this time, Elend said he wanted to appear in control
by being the one who greeted each Assemblyman as he arrived.
Today, the vote for
king would occur.
Vin and Elend stood
on the stage, nodding to the Assemblymen as they entered through the
room's side door. On the floor of the room, the benches were already
growing crowded. The first few rows, as always, were seeded with
guards.
"You look
beautiful today," Elend said, looking at Vin.
Vin shrugged. She
had worn her white gown, a flowing garment with a few diaphanous
layers on the top. Like the others, it was designed for mobility, and
it matched Elend's new outfits—especially with the dark
embroidery on the sleeves. Her jewelry was gone, but she did have a
few white wooden barrettes for her hair.
"It's odd,"
she said, "how quickly wearing these gowns became natural for me
again."
"I'm glad you
made the switch," Elend said. "The trousers and shirt are
you . . . but this is you, too. The part of you I remember from the
balls, when we barely knew each other."
Vin smiled
wistfully, looking up at him, the gathering crowd growing a bit more
distant. "You never did dance with me."
"I'm sorry,"
he said, holding her arm with a light touch. "We haven't had
much time for each other lately, have we?"
Vin shook her head.
"I'll fix
that," Elend said. "Once this confusion is all through,
once the throne is secure, we can get back to us."
Vin nodded, then
turned sharply as she noticed movement behind her. An Assemblyman
walking across the stage.
"You're
jumpy," Elend said, frowning slightly. "Even more than
usual. What am I missing?"
Vin shook her head.
"I don't know."
Elend greeted the
Assemblyman—one of the skaa representatives—with a firm
handshake. Vin stood at his side, her earlier wistfulness evaporating
like mist as her mind returned to the moment. What is bothering
me?
The room was
packed—everyone wanted to witness the events of the day. Elend
had been forced to post guards at the doors to maintain order. But,
it wasn't just the number of people that made her edgy. It was a
sense of . . . wrongness to the event. People were gathering like
carrion feeders to a rotting carcass.
"This isn't
right," Vin said, holding Elend's arm as the Assemblyman moved
off. "Governments shouldn't change hands based on arguments made
from a lectern."
"Just because
it hasn't happened that way in the past doesn't mean it shouldn't
happen," Elend said.
Vin shook her head.
"Something is going to go wrong, Elend. Cett will surprise you,
and maybe Penrod will, too. Men like them won't sit still and let a
vote decide their future."
"I know,"
Elend said. "But they aren't the only ones who can offer up
surprises."
Vin looked at him
quizzically. "You're planning something?"
He paused, then
glanced at her. "I . . . well, Ham and I came up with something
last night. A ploy. I've been trying to find a way to talk to you
about it, but there just hasn't been time. We had to move quickly."
Vin frowned,
sensing his apprehension. She started to say something, but then
stopped, studying his eyes. He seemed a little embarrassed. "What?"
she asked.
"Well . . . it
kind of involves you, and your reputation. I was going to ask
permission, but . . . "
Vin felt a slight
chill. Behind them, the last Assemblyman took his seat, and Penrod
stood up to conduct the meeting. He glanced toward Elend, clearing
his throat.
Elend cursed
quietly. "Look, I don't have time to explain," he said.
"But, it's really not a big deal—it might not even get me
that many votes. But, well, I had to try. And it doesn't change
anything. Between us, I mean."
"What?"
"Lord
Venture?" Penrod said. "Are you ready for this meeting to
begin?"
The hall grew
quiet. Vin and Elend still stood in the center of the stage, between
the lectern and the seats of the Assembly members. She looked at him,
torn between a sense of dread, a sense of confusion, and a slight
sense of betrayal.
Why didn't you
tell me? she thought. How can I be ready if you don't tell me
what you're planning? And . . . why are you looking at me like that?
"I'm sorry,"
Elend said, moving over to take his seat.
Vin remained
standing alone before the audience. Once, so much attention would
have terrified her. It still made her uncomfortable. She ducked her
head slightly, walking toward the back benches and her empty spot.
Ham wasn't there.
Vin frowned, turning as Penrod opened the proceedings. There,
she thought, finding Ham in the audience, sitting calmly with a group
of skaa. The group was obviously conversing quietly, but even with
tin, Vin would never be able to pick out their voices in the large
crowd. Breeze stood with some of Ham's soldiers at the back of the
room. It didn't matter if they knew about Elend's plan—they
were too far away for her to interrogate them.
Annoyed, she
arranged her skirts, then sat. She hadn't felt so blind since . . .
Since that night
a year ago, she thought, that moment just before we figured
out Kelsier's true plan, that moment when I thought everything was
collapsing around me.
Perhaps that was a
good sign. Had Elend cooked up some last-minute flash of political
brilliance? It didn't really matter that he hadn't shared it with
her; she probably wouldn't understand the legal basis for it anyway.
But . . . he
always shared his plans with me before.
Penrod continued to
drone on, likely maximizing his time in front of the Assembly. Cett
was on the front bench of the audience, surrounded by a good twenty
soldiers, sitting with a look of self-satisfaction. As well he
should. From the accounts she'd heard, Cett stood to take the vote
with ease.
But what was Elend
planning?
Penrod will vote
for himself, Vin thought. So will Elend. That leaves
twenty-two votes. The merchants are behind Cett, and so are the skaa.
They're too afraid of that army to vote for anyone else.
That only leaves
the nobility. Some of them will vote for Penrod—he's the
strongest nobleman in the city; many of the members of the Assembly
are longtime political allies of his. But, even if he takes half of
the nobility—which he probably won't—Cett will win. Cett
only needs a two-thirds majority to get the throne.
Eight merchants,
eight skaa. Sixteen men on Cett's side. He was going to win. What
could Elend possibly do?
Penrod finally
finished his opening announcements. "But, before we vote,"
he said, "I would like to offer time to the candidates to make
any final addresses they wish. Lord Cett, would you care to go
first?"
In the audience,
Cett shook his head. "I've made my offers and my threats,
Penrod. You all know you have to vote for me."
Vin frowned. He
seemed certain of himself, and yet . . . She scanned the crowd, eyes
falling on Ham. He was talking to Captain Demoux. And seated next to
them was one of the men who had followed her in the market. A priest
of the Survivor.
Vin turned,
studying the Assembly. The skaa representatives looked uncomfortable.
She glanced at Elend, who stood up to take his turn at the front of
the lectern. His earlier confidence had returned, and he looked regal
in his sharp white uniform. He still wore his crown.
It doesn't
change things, he'd said. Between us . . . .
I'm sorry.
Something that
would use her reputation to gain him votes. Her reputation was
Kelsier's reputation, and only the skaa really cared about that. And
there was one easy way to gain influence with them . . . .
"You joined
the Church of the Survivor, didn't you?" she whispered.
The reactions of
the skaa Assemblymen, the logic of the moment, Elend's words to her
before, all of them suddenly made sense. If Elend joined the Church,
the skaa Assemblymen might be afraid to vote against him. And, Elend
didn't need sixteen votes to gain the throne; if the Assembly
deadlocked, he won. With the eight skaa and his own vote, the others
would never be able to oust him.
"Very clever,"
she whispered.
The ploy might not
work. It would depend on how much hold the Church of the Survivor had
on the skaa Assemblymen. Yet, even if some skaa voted against Elend,
there were still the noblemen who would probably vote for Penrod. If
enough did, Elend would still deadlock the Assembly and keep his
throne.
All it would cost
was his integrity.
That's unfair,
Vin told herself. If Elend had joined with the Church of the
Survivor, he would hold to whatever promises he had made. And, if the
Church of the Survivor gained official backing, it could become as
powerful in Luthadel as the Steel Ministry had once been. And . . .
how would that change the way Elend saw her?
This doesn't
change anything, he had promised.
She dully heard him
begin to speak, and his references to Kelsier now seemed obvious to
her. Yet, the only thing she could feel was a slight sense of
anxiety. It was as Zane had said. She was the knife—a different
kind of knife, but still a tool. The means by which Elend would
protect the city.
She should be
furious, or at least sick. Why did her eyes keep darting toward the
crowd? Why couldn't she focus on what Elend was saying, on how he was
elevating her? Why was she suddenly so on edge?
Why were those men
subtly moving their way around the edges of the room?
"So,"
Elend said, "by the blessing of the Survivor himself, I ask you
to vote for me."
He waited quietly.
It was a drastic move; joining the Church of the Survivor put Elend
under the spiritual authority of an external group. But, Ham and
Demoux both had thought it a good idea. Elend had spent the better
part of the previous day getting the word out to the skaa citizens
about his decision.
It felt like a good
move. The only thing he worried about was Vin. He glanced at her. She
didn't like her place in the Church of the Survivor, and having Elend
join it meant that he—technically—accepted her part in
the mythology. He tried to catch her eye and smile, but she wasn't
watching him. She was looking out into the audience.
Elend frowned. Vin
stood up.
A man from the
audience suddenly shoved aside two soldiers in the front row, then
leaped supernaturally far to land up on the dais. The man pulled out
a dueling cane.
What? Elend
thought in shock. Fortunately, months spent sparring at Tindwyl's
command had given him instincts he didn't know he had. As the Thug
charged, Elend tucked and rolled. He hit the ground, scrambling, and
turned to see the beefy man bearing down on him, dueling cane raised.
A flurry of white
lace and skirts fluttered through the air over Elend. Vin slammed
feet-first into the Thug, throwing him backward as she spun, skirts
flaring.
The man grunted.
Vin landed with a thump directly in front of Elend. The Assembly Hall
echoed with sudden screaming and shouts.
Vin kicked the
lectern out of the way. "Stay behind me," she whispered, an
obsidian dagger glittering in her right hand.
Elend nodded
hesitantly, unbuckling the sword at his waist as he climbed to his
feet. The Thug wasn't alone; three small groups of armed men were
moving through the room. One attacked the front row, distracting the
guards there. Another group was climbing onto the dais. The third
group seemed occupied by something in the crowd. Cett's soldiers.
The Thug had
regained his feet. He didn't look like he had suffered much from
Vin's kick.
Assassins,
Elend thought. But who sent them?
The man smiled as
he was joined by a group of five friends. Chaos filled the room,
Assemblymen scattering, their bodyguards rushing to surround them.
Yet, the fighting in front of the stage kept anyone from escaping in
that direction. The Assemblymen clogged around the stage's side exit.
The attackers, however, didn't seem concerned with them.
Only with Elend.
Vin remained in her
crouch, waiting for the men to attack first, her posture threatening
despite the frilly dress. Elend thought he actually heard her growl
quietly.
The men attacked.
Vin snapped
forward, swiping at the lead Thug with a dagger. His reach was too
great, however, and he easily fended her off with a swipe of his
staff. There were six men in total; three who were obviously Thugs,
leaving the other three to likely be Coinshots or Lurchers. A strong
component of metal-controllers. Someone didn't want her ending this
fight quickly with coins.
They didn't
understand that she would never use coins in this situation. Not with
Elend standing so close and with so many people in the room. Coins
couldn't be deflected safely. If she shot a handful at her enemies,
random people would die.
She had to kill
these men fast. They were already fanning out, surrounding her and
Elend. They moved in pairs—one Thug and one Coinshot in each
team. They would attack from the sides, trying to get past her to
Elend.
Vin reached behind
herself with iron, Pulling Elend's sword from its sheath with a
ringing squeal. She caught it by the hilt, throwing it at one of the
teams. The Coinshot Pushed it back at her, and she in turn Pushed it
to the side, spinning it toward a second pair of Allomancers.
One of them Pushed
it back at her again. Vin Pulled from behind, whipping Elend's
metal-tipped sheath out of his hands and shooting it through the air
by its clasp. Sheath passed sword in the air. This time, the enemy
Coinshots Pushed both items out of the way, deflecting them toward
the fleeing audience.
Men shouted in
desperation as they trampled and tried to force their way out of the
room. Vin gritted her teeth. She needed a better weapon.
She flung a stone
dagger at one assassin pair, then jumped toward another, spinning
beneath the attacking Thug's weapon. The Coinshot didn't have any
metal on him that she could sense; he was just there to keep her from
killing the Thug with coins. They probably assumed that Vin would be
easy to defeat, as she was deprived of the ability to shoot coins.
The Thug brought
his staff back around, trying to catch her with the end. She caught
the weapon, yanking it forward and jumping up as she Pushed against
the Assembly bleachers behind her. Her feet hit the Thug in the
chest, and she kicked hard with flared pewter. As he grunted, Vin
Pulled herself back toward the nails in the bleachers as hard as she
could.
The Thug managed to
stay on his feet. He seemed completely surprised, however, to find
Vin streaking away from him, holding his staff in her hands.
She landed and spun
toward Elend. He'd found himself a weapon—a dueling cane—and
had the good sense to back himself against a wall. To her right, some
of the Assemblymen stood in a huddle, surrounded by their guards. The
room was too full, the exits too small and cramped, for them all to
escape.
The Assemblymen
made no moves to help Elend.
One of the
assassins cried out, pointing as Vin Pushed against the bleachers and
shot toward them, moving herself in front of Elend. Two Thugs raised
their weapons as Vin turned in the air, lightly Pulling against a
door's hinges to spin herself. Her gown fluttered as she landed.
I really have to
thank that dressmaker, she thought as she raised the staff. She
briefly considered ripping the dress free anyway, but the Thugs were
upon her too quickly. She blocked both blows at once, then threw
herself between the men, flaring pewter, moving faster than even
they.
One of them cursed,
trying to bring his staff around. Vin broke his leg before he could.
He dropped with a howl, and Vin leaped onto his back, forcing him to
the ground as she swung an overhand blow at the second Thug. He
blocked, then shoved his weapon against hers to throw her back off
his companion.
Elend attacked. The
king's actions, however, seemed sluggish compared with the movements
of men burning pewter. The Thug turned almost nonchalantly, smashing
Elend's weapon with an easy blow.
Vin cursed as she
fell. She hurled her staff at the Thug, forcing him to turn away from
Elend. He barely ducked out of the way as Vin hit the ground, bounced
to her feet, and whipped out a second dagger. She dashed forward
before the Thug could turn back to Elend.
A spray of coins
flew toward her. She couldn't Push them back, not toward the crowd.
She cried out—throwing herself between the coins and Elend—then
Pushed to the sides, dividing them as best she could so they sprayed
against the wall. Even so, she felt a flash of pain from her
shoulder.
Where did he get
the coins? she thought with frustration. However, as she glanced
to the side, she saw the Coinshot standing beside a cowering
Assemblyman, who had been forced to give up his coin pouch.
Vin gritted her
teeth. Her arm still worked. That was all that mattered. She yelled
and threw herself at the closest Thug. However, the third Thug had
regained his weapon—the one Vin had thrown—and was now
circling with his Coinshot to try and get behind Vin.
One at a time,
Vin thought.
The Thug nearest
her swung his weapon. She needed to surprise him. So, she didn't
dodge or block. She simply took his blow in the side, burning
duralumin and pewter to resist. Something cracked, within her as she
was hit, but with duralumin, she was strong enough to stay up. Wood
shattered, and she continued forward, slamming her dagger into the
Thug's neck.
He dropped,
revealing a surprised Coinshot behind him. Vin's pewter evaporated
with the duralumin, and pain blossomed like a sunrise in her side.
Even so, she yanked her dagger free as the Thug fell, still moving
quickly enough to drop the Coinshot with a dagger in the chest.
Then she stumbled,
gasping quietly, holding her side as two men died at her feet.
One Thug left,
she thought desperately. And two Coinshots.
Elend needs me.
To the side, she saw one of the Coinshots fire a spray of stolen
coins at Elend. She cried out, Pushing them away, and she heard the
Coinshot cursing.
She turned—counting
on the blue lines from her steel to warn her if the Coinshots tried
shooting anything else at Elend—and ripped her backup vial of
metal from her sleeve, where it had been tied tightly to keep it from
being Pulled away. However, even as she yanked the stopper open, the
vial lurched from her now undexterous hand. The second Coinshot
grinned as he Pushed the vial away, tipping it and spraying its
contents across the floor.
Vin growled, but
her mind was growing fuzzy. She needed pewter. Without it, the large
coin wound in her shoulder—its blood turning her lacy sleeve
red—and the crushing pain in her side were too much. She almost
couldn't think.
A staff swung
toward her head. She jerked to the side, rolling. However, she no
longer had the grace or speed of pewter. A normal man's blow she
could have dodged, but the attack of an Allomancer was another thing.
I shouldn't have
burned duralumin! she thought. It had been a gamble, letting her
kill two assassins, but it had left her too exposed. The staff
descended toward her.
Something large
slammed into the Thug, bearing him to the ground in a growling flurry
of claws. Vin came out of her dodge as the Thug punched OreSeur in
the head, cracking his skull. Yet, the Thug was bleeding and cursing,
and his staff had rolled free. Vin snatched it up, scrambling to her
feet and gritting her teeth as she drove the butt of the staff down
into the man's face. He took the blow with a curse, swiping her feet
out from under her with a kick.
She fell beside
OreSeur. The wolfhound, oddly, was smiling. There was a wound in his
shoulder.
No, not a wound. An
opening in the flesh—and a vial of metal hidden inside. Vin
snatched it, rolling, keeping it hidden as the Thug regained his
feet. She downed the liquid, and the flakes of metal it contained. On
the floor before her, she could see the shadow of the Thug raising
his weapon in a mighty overhand blow.
Pewter flared to
life inside of her, and her wounds became mere annoying buzzes. She
jerked to the side as the blow fell, hitting the floor, throwing up
bits of wood. Vin flipped to her feet, slamming her fist into the arm
of her surprised opponent.
It wasn't enough to
break the bones, but it obviously hurt. The Thug—now missing
two teeth—grunted in pain. To the side, Vin saw OreSeur on his
feet, his dog's jaw hanging unnaturally. He nodded to her; the Thug
would think him dead from the cracked skull.
More coins flew at
Elend. She Pushed them away without even looking. In front of her,
OreSeur struck the Thug from behind, making him spin in surprise just
as Vin attacked. The Thug's staff passed within a finger's width of
her head as it smashed into OreSeur's back, but her own hand took the
man in the face. She didn't punch, however; that wouldn't do much
against a Thug.
She had one finger
out, and she had incredible aim. The Thug's eye popped as she rammed
her finger into the socket.
She hopped back as
he cried out, raising a hand to his face. She smashed her fists into
his chest, throwing him to the ground, then jumped over OreSeur's
crumpled form and grabbed her dagger off the ground.
The Thug died,
clutching his face in agony, her dagger in his chest.
Vin spun, searching
desperately for Elend. He'd taken one of the fallen Thugs' weapons
and was fending off the two remaining Coinshots, who had apparently
grown frustrated by her Pushing away all of their coin attacks.
Instead, they had pulled out dueling canes to attack him directly.
Elend's training had apparently been enough to keep him alive—but
only because his opponents had to keep an eye on Vin to make certain
she didn't try using coins herself.
Vin kicked up the
staff of the man she'd just killed, catching it. A Coinshot cried out
as she growled and dashed toward them, spinning her weapon. One had
the presence of mind to Push off the bleachers and launch himself
away. Vin's weapon still caught him in midair, throwing him to the
side. The next swing took down his companion, who had tried to dash
away.
Elend stood
breathing heavily, his costume disheveled.
He did better
than I thought he would, Vin admitted, flexing, trying to judge
the damage to her side. She needed to get a bandage on that shoulder.
The coin hadn't hit bone, but the bleeding would—
"Vin!"
Elend cried out.
Something very
strong suddenly grabbed her from behind. Vin choked as she was jerked
backward and thrown to the ground.
The first Thug.
She'd broken his leg, then forgotten—
He got his hands
around her neck, squeezing as he knelt above her, his legs pressing
against her chest, his face wild with rage. His eyes bulged,
adrenaline mixing with pewter.
Vin gasped for
breath. She was taken back to years before, to beatings performed by
men looming above her. Camon, and Reen, and a dozen others.
No! she
thought, flaring her pewter, struggling. He had her pinned, however,
and he was much larger then she was. Much stronger. Elend slammed his
staff against the man's back, but the Thug barely even flinched.
Vin couldn't
breathe. She felt her throat being crushed. She tried to pry the
Thug's hands apart, but it was as Ham had always said. Her small size
was a great advantage to her in most situations—but when it
came down to brute strength, she was no match for a man of bulk and
muscle. She tried Pulling herself to the side, but the man's grip was
too strong, her weight too small compared with his.
She struggled in
vain. She had duralumin still—burning it only made other metals
vanish, not the duralumin itself—but last time that had nearly
gotten her killed. If she didn't take the Thug down quickly, she'd be
left without pewter once again.
Elend pounded,
yelling for help, but his voice sounded distant. The Thug pressed his
face almost up against Vin's, and she could see his fury. At that
moment, incredibly, a thought occurred to her.
Where have I
seen this man before?
Her vision
darkened. However, as the Thug constricted his grip, he leaned
closer, closer, closer . . . .
She didn't have a
choice. Vin burned duralumin and flared her pewter. She flung her
opponent's hands aside and smashed her head upward into his face.
The man's head
exploded as easily as the eyeball had earlier.
Vin gasped for
breath and pushed the headless corpse off her. Elend stumbled back,
his suit and face sprayed red. Vin stumbled to her feet. Her vision
swam as her pewter dissipated—but even through that, she could
see an emotion on Elend's face, stark as the blood on his brilliant
white uniform.
Horror.
No, she
thought, her mind fading. Please, Elend, not that . . . .
She fell forward,
unable to maintain consciousness.
Elend sat in his
ruined suit, hands against forehead, the wreckage of the Assembly
Hall hauntingly empty around him.
"She'll live,"
Ham said. "She actually isn't hurt that badly. Or . . . well,
not that badly for Vin. She just needs plenty of pewter and some of
Sazed's care. He says the ribs aren't even broken, just cracked."
Elend nodded
absently. Some soldiers were clearing away the corpses, among them
the six men that Vin had killed, including the one at the end . . . .
Elend squeezed his
eyes shut.
"What?"
Ham asked.
Elend opened his
eyes, forming his hand into a fist to keep it from shaking. "I
know you've seen a lot of battles, Ham," he said. "But, I'm
not used to them. I'm not used to . . . " He turned away as the
soldiers dragged away the headless body.
Ham watched the
corpse go.
"I've only
actually seen her fight once before, you know," Elend said
quietly. "In the palace, a year ago. She only threw a few men
against the walls. It was nothing like this."
Ham took a seat
beside Elend on the benches. "She's Mistborn, El. What did you
expect? A single Thug can easily take down ten men—dozens, if
he has a Coinshot to support him. A Mistborn . . . well, they're like
an army in one person."
Elend nodded. "I
know, Ham. I know she killed the Lord Ruler—she's even told me
how she faced several Steel Inquisitors. But . . . I've just never
seen . . . "
He closed his eyes
again. The image of Vin stumbling toward him at the end, her
beautiful white ball gown covered in the gore of a man she'd just
killed with her forehead . . .
She did it to
protect me, he thought. But that doesn't make it any less
disturbing.
Maybe that even
makes it a little more disturbing.
He forced his eyes
open. He couldn't afford to be distracted; he had to be strong. He
was king.
"You think
Straff sent them?" Elend asked.
Ham nodded. "Who
else? They targeted you and Cett. I guess your threat to kill Straff
wasn't as binding as we assumed."
"How is Cett?"
"He barely
escaped alive. As it is, they slaughtered half of his soldiers. In
the fray, Demoux and I couldn't even see what was happening up on the
stage with you and Vin."
Elend nodded. By
the time Ham had arrived, Vin had already dealt with the assassins.
It had taken her only a few minutes to wipe out all six of them.
Ham was silent for
a moment. Finally, he turned to Elend. "I'll admit, El," he
said quietly. "I'm impressed. I didn't see the fight, but I saw
the aftermath. It's one thing to fight six Allomancers, but it's
another to do that while trying to protect a regular person, and to
keep any by-standers from harm. And that last man . . . "
"Do you
remember when she saved Breeze?" Elend asked. "It was so
far away, but I swear I saw her throw horses into the air with her
Allomancy. Have you ever heard of anything like that?"
Ham shook his head.
Elend sat quietly
for a moment. "I think we need to do some planning. What with
today's events, we can't . . . "
Ham looked up as
Elend trailed off. "What?"
"Messenger,"
Elend said, nodding toward the doorway. Sure enough, the man
presented himself to the soldiers, then was escorted up to the stage.
Elend stood, walking over to meet the short man, who wore Penrod's
heraldry on his coat.
"My lord,"
the man said, bowing. "I've been sent to inform you that the
voting will proceed at Lord Penrod's mansion."
"The voting?"
Ham asked. "What nonsense is this? His Majesty was nearly killed
today!"
"I'm sorry, my
lord," the aide said. "I was simply told to deliver the
message."
Elend sighed. He'd
hoped that, in the confusion, Penrod wouldn't remember the deadline.
"If they don't choose a new leader today, Ham, then I get to
retain the crown. They've already wasted their grace period."
Ham sighed. "And
if there are more assassins?" he asked quietly. "Vin will
be laid up for a few days, at least."
"I can't rely
on her to protect me all the time," Elend said. "Let's go."
"I vote for
myself," Lord Penrod said.
Not unexpected,
Elend thought. He sat in Penrod's comfortable lounge, accompanied by
a group of shaken Assemblymen—none of whom, thankfully, had
been hurt in the attack. Several held drinks, and there was a
veritable army of guards waiting around the perimeter, eyeing each
other warily. The crowded room also held Noorden and three other
scribes, who were there to witness the voting, according to the law.
"I vote for
Lord Penrod as well," said Lord Dukaler.
Also not
unexpected, Elend thought. I wonder how much that cost Penrod.
Mansion Penrod was
not a keep, but it was lavishly decorated. The plushness of Elend's
chair was welcome as a relief from the tensions of the day. Yet,
Elend feared that it was too soothing. It would be very easy to drift
off . . . .
"I vote for
Cett," said Lord Habren.
Elend perked up. It
was the second for Cett, which put him behind Penrod by three.
Everyone turned to
Elend. "I vote for myself," he said, trying to project a
firmness that was hard to maintain after everything that had
happened. The merchants were next. Elend settled back, prepared for
the expected run of votes for Cett.
"I vote for
Penrod," Philen said.
Elend sat upright,
alert. What!
The next merchant
voted for Penrod as well. As did the next, and the next. Elend sat
stunned, listening. What did I miss? he thought. He glanced at
Ham, who shrugged in confusion.
Philen glanced at
Elend, smiling pleasantly. Elend couldn't tell if there was
bitterness or satisfaction in that look, however. They switched
allegiances? That quickly? Philen had been the one to sneak Cett
into the city in the first place.
Elend looked down
the row of merchants, trying with little success to gauge their
reactions. Cett himself wasn't in the meeting; he had retreated to
Keep Hasting to nurse his wound.
"I vote for
Lord Venture," said Haws, foremost of the skaa faction. This
also managed to get a stir out of the room. Haws met Elend's eye, and
nodded. He was a firm believer in the Church of the Survivor, and
while the different preachers of the religion were beginning to
disagree on how to organize their followers, they all agreed that a
believer on the throne would be better for them than handing the city
over to Cett.
There will be a
price to pay for this allegiance, Elend thought as the skaa
voted. They knew Elend's reputation for honesty, and he would not
betray their trust.
He had told them he
would become an open member of their sect. He hadn't promised them
belief, but he had promised them devotion. He still wasn't certain
what he had given away, but both of them knew they would need each
other.
"I vote for
Penrod," said Jasten, a canal worker.
"As do I,"
said Thurts, his brother.
Elend gritted his
teeth. He'd known they would be trouble; they never had liked the
Church of the Survivor. But, four of the skaa had already given him
their votes. With only two remaining, he had a very good shot at a
deadlock.
"I vote for
Venture," said the next man.
"I do, too,"
said the final skaa. Elend gave the man, Vet, a smile of
appreciation.
That left fifteen
votes for Penrod, two for Cett, and seven for Elend. Deadlock. Elend
reclined slightly, head resting against the chair's pillowed back,
sighing softly.
You did your
job, Vin, he thought. I did mine. Now we just need to keep
this country in one piece.
"Um," a
voice asked, "am I allowed to change my vote?"
Elend opened his
eyes. It was Lord Habren, one of the votes for Cett.
"I mean, it's
obvious now that Cett isn't going to win," Habren said, flushing
slightly. The young man was a distant cousin of the Elariel family,
which was probably how he'd gotten his seat. Names still meant power
in Luthadel.
"I'm not sure
if you can change or not," Lord Penrod said.
"Well, I'd
rather my vote meant something," Habren said. "There are
only two votes for Cett, after all."
The room fell
silent. One by one, the members of the Assembly turned to Elend.
Noorden the scribe met Elend's eyes. There was a clause allowing for
men to change their votes, assuming that the chancellor hadn't
officially closed the voting—which, indeed, he hadn't.
The clause was a
rather oblique; Noorden was probably the only other one in the room
who knew the law well enough to interpret it. He nodded slightly,
still meeting Elend's eyes. He would hold his tongue.
Elend sat still in
a room full of men who trusted him, even as they rejected him. He
could do as Noorden did. He could say nothing, or could say that he
didn't know.
"Yes,"
Elend said softly. "The law allows for you to change your vote,
Lord Habren. You may only do so once, and must do so before the
winner is declared. Everyone else has the same opportunity."
"Then I vote
for Lord Penrod," Habren said.
"As do I,"
said Lord Hue, the other who had voted for Cett.
Elend closed his
eyes.
"Are there any
other alterations?" Lord Penrod asked.
No one spoke.
"Then,"
Penrod said, "I see seventeen votes for myself, seven votes for
Lord Venture. I officially close the voting and humbly accept your
appointment as king. I shall serve as best I can in this capacity."
Elend stood, then
slowly removed his crown. "Here," he said, setting it on
the mantle. "You'll need this."
He nodded to Ham,
then left without looking back at the men who had discarded him.





PART FOUR
KNIVES
I know your
argument. We speak of the Anticipation, of things foretold, of
promises made by our greatest prophets of old. Of course the Hero of
Ages will fit the prophecies. He will fit them perfectly. That's the
idea.





39
STRAFF VENTURE RODE
QUIETLY IN the misty twilight air. Though he would have preferred a
carriage, he felt it important to travel by horseback and present a
compelling image for the troops. Zane, not surprisingly, chose to
walk. He sauntered along beside Straff's horse, the two of them
leading a group of fifty soldiers.
Even with the
troops, Straff felt exposed. It wasn't just the mists, and it wasn't
just the darkness. He could still remember her touch on his emotions.
"You've failed
me, Zane," Straff said.
The Mistborn looked
up, and—burning tin—Straff could see a frown on his face.
"Failed?"
"Venture and
Cett still live. Beyond that, you sent a batch of my best Allomancers
to their deaths."
"I warned you
that they might die," Zane said.
"For a
purpose, Zane," Straff said sternly. "Why did you need a
group of secret Allomancers if you were just going to send them on a
suicide mission in the middle of a public gathering? You may assume
our resources to be unlimited, but let me assure you—those six
men cannot be replaced."
It had taken Straff
decades of work with his mistresses to gather so many hidden
Allomancers. It had been pleasurable work, but work all the same. In
one reckless gambit, Zane had destroyed a good third of Straff's
Allomancer children.
My children
dead, our hand exposed, and that . . . creature of Elend's still
lives!
"I'm sorry,
Father," Zane said. "I thought that the chaos and crowded
quarters would keep the girl isolated, and force her not to use
coins. I really thought this would work."
Straff frowned. He
well knew that Zane thought himself more competent than his father;
what Mistborn wouldn't think such a thing? Only a delicate mixture of
bribery, threats, and manipulation kept Zane under control.
Yet, no matter what
Zane thought, Straff was no fool. He knew, at that moment, that Zane
was hiding something. Why send those men to die? Straff
thought. He must have intended them to fail—otherwise he
would have helped them fight the girl.
"No,"
Zane said softly, talking to himself as he sometimes did. "He's
my father . . . " He trailed off, then shook his head sharply.
"No. Not them either."
Lord Ruler,
Straff thought, looking down at the muttering madman beside him. What
have I gotten myself into? Zane was growing more unpredictable.
Had he sent those men to die out of jealousy, out of lust for
violence, or had he simply been bored? Straff didn't think
that Zane had turned on him, but it was difficult to tell. Either
way, Straff didn't like having to rely on Zane for his plans to work.
He didn't really like having to rely on Zane for anything.
Zane looked up at
Straff, and stopped talking. He did a good job of hiding his
insanity, most of the time. A good enough job that Straff sometimes
forgot about it. Yet, it still lurked there, beneath the surface.
Zane was as dangerous a tool as Straff had ever used. The protection
provided by a Mistborn outweighed the danger of Zane's insanity.
Barely.
"You needn't
worry, Father," Zane said. "The city will still be yours."
"It will never
be mine as long as that woman lives," Straff said. He shivered.
Perhaps that's what this was all about. Zane's attack was so
obvious that everyone in the city knows I was behind it, and when
that Mistborn demon wakes, she will come after me in retribution.
But, if that
were Zane's goal, then why not just kill me himself? Zane didn't
make sense. He didn't have to. That was, perhaps, one of the
advantages of being insane.
Zane shook his
head. "I think you will be surprised, Father. One way or
another, you will soon have nothing to fear from Vin."
"She thinks I
tried to have her beloved king assassinated."
Zane smiled. "No,
I don't think that she does. She's far too clever for that."
Too clever to
see the truth? Straff thought. However, his tin-enhanced ears
heard shuffling in the mists. He held up a hand, halting his
procession. In the distance, he could just barely pick out the
flickering blobs of wall-top torches. They were close to the
city—uncomfortably close.
Straff's procession
waited quietly. Then, from the mists before them, a man on horseback
appeared, accompanied by fifty soldiers of his own. Ferson Penrod.
"Straff,"
Penrod said, nodding.
"Ferson."
"Your men did
well," Penrod said. "I'm glad your son didn't have to die.
He's a good lad. A bad king, but an earnest man."
A lot of my sons
died today, Ferson, Straff thought. The fact that Elend still
lives isn't fortunate—it's irony.
"You are ready
to deliver the city?" Straff asked.
Penrod nodded.
"Philen and his merchants want assurances that they will have
titles to match those Cett promised them."
Straff waved a
dismissive hand. "You know me, Ferson." You used to
practically grovel before me at parties every week. "I
always honor business agreements. I'd be an idiot not to appease
those merchants—they're the ones who will bring me tax revenue
from this dominance."
Penrod nodded. "I'm
glad we could come to an understanding, Straff. I don't trust Cett."
"I doubt you
trust me," Straff said.
Penrod smiled. "But
I do know you, Straff. You're one of us—a Luthadel nobleman.
Besides, you have produced the most stable kingdom in the dominances.
That's all we're looking for right now. A little stability for this
people."
"You almost
sound like that fool son of mine."
Penrod paused, then
shook his head. "Your boy isn't a fool, Straff. He's just an
idealist. In truth, I'm sad to see his little utopia fall."
"If you are
sad for him, Ferson, then you are an idiot, too."
Penrod stiffened.
Straff caught the man's proud eyes, holding them with his stare,
until Penrod looked down. The exchange was a simple one, mostly
meaningless—but it did serve as a very important reminder.
Straff chuckled.
"You're going to have to get used to being a small fish again,
Ferson."
"I know."
"Be cheerful,"
Straff said. "Assuming this turnover of power happens as you
promised, no one will have to end up dead. Who knows, maybe I'll let
you keep that crown of yours."
Penrod looked up.
"For a long
time, this land didn't have kings," Straff said quietly. "It
had something greater. Well, I'm not the Lord Ruler—but I can
be an emperor. You want to keep your crown and rule as a subject king
under me?"
"That depends
on the cost, Straff," Penrod said carefully.
Not completely
quelled, then. Penrod had always been clever; he'd been the most
important nobleman to stay behind in Luthadel, and his gamble had
certainly worked.
"The cost is
exorbitant," Straff said. "Ridiculously so."
"The atium,"
Penrod guessed.
Straff nodded.
"Elend hasn't found it, but it's here, somewhere. I was the one
who mined those geodes—my men spent decades harvesting them and
bringing them to Luthadel. I know how much of it we harvested, and I
know that nowhere near the same amount came back out in disbursements
to the nobility. The rest is in that city, somewhere."
Penrod nodded.
"I'll see what I can find, Straff."
Straff raised an
eyebrow. "You need to get back into practice, Ferson."
Penrod paused, then
bowed his head. "I'll see what I can find, my lord."
"Good. Now,
what news did you bring of Elend's mistress?"
"She collapsed
after the fight," Penrod said. "I employ a spy on the
cooking staff, and she said she delivered a bowl of broth to Lady
Vin's room. It returned cold."
Straff frowned.
"Could this woman of yours slip the Mistborn something?"
Penrod paled
slightly. "I . . . don't think that would be wise, my lord.
Besides, you know Mistborn constitutions."
Perhaps she
really is incapacitated, Straff thought. If we moved in .
. . The chill of her touch on his emotions returned. Numbness.
Nothingness.
"You needn't
fear her so, my lord," Penrod said.
Straff raised an
eyebrow. "I'm not afraid, I'm wary. I will not move into that
city until my safety is assured—and until I move in, your city
is in danger from Cett. Or, worse. What would happen if those koloss
decide to attack the city, Ferson? I'm in negotiations with their
leader, and he seems to be able to control them. For now. Have you
ever seen the aftermath of a koloss slaughter?"
He probably hadn't;
Straff hadn't until just recently. Penrod just shook his head. "Vin
won't attack you. Not if the Assembly votes to put you in command of
the city. The transfer will be perfectly legal."
"I doubt she
cares about legality."
"Perhaps,"
Penrod said. "But Elend does. And, where he commands, the
girl follows."
Unless he has as
little control over her as I have over Zane, Straff thought,
shivering. No matter what Penrod said, Straff wasn't going to take
the city until that horrible creature was dealt with. In this, he
could rely only on Zane.
And that thought
frightened him almost as much as Vin did.
Without further
discussion, Straff waved to Penrod, dismissing him. Penrod turned and
retreated into the mists with his entourage. Even with his tin,
Straff barely heard Zane land on the ground beside him. Straff
turned, looking at the Mistborn.
"You really
think he'd turn the atium over to you if he found it?" Zane
asked quietly.
"Perhaps,"
Straff said. "He has to know that he'd never be able to hold on
to it—he doesn't have the military might to protect a treasure
like that. And, if he doesn't give it to me . . . well, it would
probably be easier to take the atium from him than it would be to
find it on my own."
Zane seemed to find
the answer satisfactory. He waited for a few moments, staring into
the mists. Then he looked at Straff, a curious expression on his
face. "What time is it?"
Straff checked his
pocket watch, something no Mistborn would carry. Too much metal.
"Eleven seventeen," he said.
Zane nodded,
turning back to look at the city. "It should have taken effect
by now."
Straff frowned.
Then he began to sweat. He flared tin, clamping his eyes shut. There!
he thought, noticing a weakness inside of him. "More poison?"
he asked, keeping the fear from his voice, forcing himself to be
calm.
"How do you do
it, Father?" Zane asked. "I thought for certain you'd
missed this one. Yet, here you are, just fine."
Straff was
beginning to feel weak. "One doesn't need to be Mistborn to be
capable, Zane," he snapped.
Zane shrugged,
smiling in the haunting way only he could—keenly intelligent,
yet eerily unstable. Then he just shook his head. "You win
again," he said, then shot upward into the sky, churning mists
with his passing.
Straff immediately
turned his horse, trying to maintain his decorum as he urged it back
toward the camp. He could feel the poison. Feel it stealing his life.
Feel it threatening him, overcoming him . . . .
He went, perhaps,
too quickly. It was difficult to maintain an air of strength when you
were dying. Finally, he broke into a gallop. He left his startled
guards behind, and they called in surprise, breaking into a jog to
try and keep up.
Straff ignored
their complaints. He kicked the horse faster. Could he feel the
poison slowing his reactions? Which one had Zane used? Gurwraith? No,
it required injection. Tompher, perhaps? Or . . . perhaps he had
found one that Straff didn't even know about.
He could only hope
that wasn't the case. For, if Straff didn't know of the poison, then
Amaranta probably wouldn't know of it either, and wouldn't be able to
put the antidote into her catch-all healing potion.
The lights of camp
illuminated the mists. Soldiers cried out as Straff approached, and
he was nearly run through as one of his own men leveled a spear at
the charging horse. Fortunately, the man recognized him in time.
Straff rode the man down even as he turned aside his spear.
Straff charged
right up to his tent. By now, his men were scattering, preparing as
if for an invasion, or some other attack. There was no way he could
hide this from Zane.
I wouldn't be
able to hide my death either.
"My lord!"
a captain said, dashing up to him.
"Send for
Amaranta," Straff said, stumbling off his horse.
The soldier paused.
"Your mistress, lord?" the man said, frowning. "Why—"
"Now!"
Straff commanded, throwing back his tent flap, walking inside. He
paused, legs trembling as the tent flap closed. He wiped his brow
with a hesitant hand. Too much sweat.
Damn him! he
thought with frustration. I have to kill him, contain him . . . I
have to do something. I can't rule like this!
But what? He'd sat
up nights, he'd wasted days, trying to decide what to do about Zane.
The atium he used to bribe the man no longer seemed a good motivator.
Zane's actions this day—slaughtering Straff's children in an
obviously hopeless attempt to kill Elend's mistress—proved that
he could no longer be trusted, even in a small way.
Amaranta arrived
with surprising speed, and she immediately began mixing her antidote.
Eventually, as Straff slurped down the horrid-tasting
concoction—feeling its healing effects immediately—he
came to an uneasy conclusion.
Zane had to die.
And yet . . .
something about all this seemed so convenient. It felt almost as if
we constructed a hero to fit our prophecies, rather than allowing one
to arise naturally. This was the worry I had, the thing that should
have given me pause when my brethren came to me, finally willing to
believe.





40
ELEND SAT BESIDE
HER BED.
That comforted her.
Though she slept fitfully, a piece of her knew that he was there,
watching over her. It felt odd to be beneath his protective care, for
she was the one who usually did the guarding.
So, when she
finally woke, she wasn't surprised to find him in the chair beside
her bed, reading quietly by soft candlelight. As she came fully
awake, she didn't jump up, or search the room with apprehension.
Instead, she sat up slowly, pulling the blanket up under her arms,
then took a sip of the water that had been left for her beside the
bed.
Elend closed the
book and turned toward her, smiling. Vin searched those soft eyes,
delving for hints of the horror she had seen before. The disgust, the
terror, the shock.
He knew her for a
monster. How could he smile so kindly?
"Why?"
she asked quietly.
"Why what?"
he asked.
"Why wait
here?" she said. "I'm not dying—I remember that
much."
Elend shrugged. "I
just wanted to be near you."
She said nothing. A
coal stove burned in the corner, though it needed more fuel. Winter
was close, and it was looking to be a cold one. She wore only a
nightgown; she'd asked the maids not to put one on her, but by then
Sazed's draught—to help her sleep—had already begun
taking effect, and she hadn't had the energy to argue.
She pulled the
blanket closer. Only then did she realize something she should have
noticed earlier. "Elend! You're not wearing your uniform."
He looked down at
his clothing—a nobleman's suit from his old wardrobe, with an
unbuttoned maroon vest. The jacket was too big for him. He shrugged.
"No need to continue the charade anymore, Vin."
"Cett is
king?" she asked with a sinking feeling.
Elend shook his
head. "Penrod."
"That doesn't
make sense."
"I know,"
he said. "We aren't sure why the merchants betrayed Cett—but
it doesn't really matter anymore. Penrod is a far better choice
anyway. Than either Cett, or me."
"You know
that's not true."
Elend sat back
contemplatively. "I don't know, Vin. I thought I was the better
man. Yet, while I thought up all kinds of schemes to keep the throne
from Cett, I never really considered the one plan that would have
been certain to defeat him—that of giving my support to Penrod,
combining our votes. What if my arrogance had landed us with Cett? I
wasn't thinking of the people."
"Elend . . . "
she said, laying a hand on his arm.
And he flinched.
It was slight,
almost unnoticeable, and he covered it quickly. But the damage was
done. Damage she had caused, damage within him. He had finally
seen—really seen—what she was. He'd fallen in love with a
lie.
"What?"
he said, looking into her face.
"Nothing,"
Vin said. She withdrew her hand. Inside, something cracked. I love
him so much. Why? Why did I let him see? If only I'd had a choice!
He's betraying
you, Reen's voice whispered in the back of her mind. Everyone
will leave you eventually, Vin.
Elend sighed,
glancing toward the shutters to her room. They were closed, keeping
the mists out, though Vin could see the darkness beyond.
"The thing is,
Vin," he said quietly, "I never really thought it would end
this way. I trusted them, right to the end. The people—the
Assemblymen they chose—I trusted that they would do the right
thing. When they didn't choose me, I was actually surprised. I
shouldn't have been. We knew that I was the long shot. I mean,
they had already voted me out once. But, I'd convinced myself that
was just a warning. Inside, in my heart, I thought that they would
reinstate me."
He shook his head.
"Now, I either have to admit that my faith in them was wrong, or
I have to trust in their decision."
That was
what she loved: his goodness, his simple honesty. Things as odd and
exotic to a skaa urchin as her own Mistborn nature must be to most
people. Even among all the good men of Kelsier's crew, even amid the
best of the nobility, she had never found another man like Elend
Venture. A man who would rather believe that the people who had
dethroned him were just trying to do the right thing.
At times, she had
felt a fool for falling in love with the first nobleman whom she grew
to know. But now she realized that her love of Elend had not come
about because of simple convenience or proximity. It had come because
of who Elend was. The fact that she had found him first was an event
of incredible fortune.
And now . . . it
was over. At least, in the form it had once had. But, she'd known all
along that it would turn out this way. That was why she'd refused his
marriage proposal, now over a year old. She couldn't marry him. Or,
rather, she couldn't let him marry her.
"I know that
sorrow in your eyes, Vin," Elend said softly.
She looked at him
with shock.
"We can get
past this," he said. "The throne wasn't everything. We
might be better off this way, actually. We did our best. Now it's
someone else's turn to try."
She smiled wanly.
He doesn't know. He must never know how much this hurts.
He's a good man—he'd try to force himself to keep loving me.
"But," he
said, "you should get some more rest."
"I feel fine,"
Vin said, stretching slightly. Her side hurt, and her neck ached, but
pewter burned within her, and none of her wounds were debilitating.
"I need to—"
She cut herself off
as a realization hit her. She sat upright, the sudden motion making
her rigid with pain. The day before was a blur, but . . .
"OreSeur!"
she said, pushing aside the blanket.
"He's fine,
Vin," Elend said. "He's a kandra. Broken bones mean nothing
to him."
She paused, half
out of bed, suddenly feeling foolish. "Where is he?"
"Digesting a
new body," Elend said, smiling.
"Why the
smile?" she asked.
"I've just
never heard someone express that much concern for a kandra before."
"Well, I don't
see why not," Vin said, climbing back in bed. "OreSeur
risked his life for me."
"He's a
kandra, Vin," Elend repeated. "I don't think those men
could have killed him; I doubt even a Mistborn could."
Vin paused. Not
even a Mistborn could. . . . What bothered her about that
statement? "Regardless," she said. "He feels pain. He
took two serious blows on my behalf."
"Just
fulfilling his Contract."
His Contract.
. . . OreSeur had attacked a human. He had broken his
Contract. For her.
"What?"
Elend asked.
"Nothing,"
Vin said quickly. "Tell me about the armies."
Elend eyed her, but
allowed the conversation to change directions. "Cett is still
holed up in Keep Hasting. We're not sure what his reaction will be.
The Assembly didn't choose him, which can't be good. And yet, he
hasn't protested—he has to realize that he's trapped in here
now."
"He must have
really believed that we'd choose him," Vin said, frowning. "Why
else would he come into the city?"
Elend shook his
head. "It was an odd move in the first place. Anyway, I have
advised the Assembly to try and make a deal with him. I think he
believes that the atium isn't in the city, so there's really no
reason for him to want Luthadel."
"Except for
the prestige."
"Which
wouldn't be worth losing his army," Elend's said. "Or his
life."
Vin nodded. "And
your father?"
"Silent,"
Elend said. "It's strange, Vin. This isn't like him—those
assassins were so blatant. I'm not sure what to make of them."
"The
assassins," Vin said, sitting back in the bed. "You've
identified them?"
Elend shook his
head. "Nobody recognizes them."
Vin frowned.
"Maybe we
aren't as familiar with the noblemen out in the Northern Dominance as
we thought we were."
No, Vin
thought. No, if they were from a city as close as Urteau—Straff's
home—some of them would be known, wouldn't they? "I
thought I recognized one of them," Vin finally said.
"Which one?"
"The . . .
last one."
Elend paused. "Ah.
Well, I guess we won't be able to identify him now."
"Elend, I'm
sorry you had to see that."
"What?"
Elend asked. "Vin, I've seen death before. I was forced to
attend the Lord Ruler's executions, remember?" He paused. "Not
that what you did was like that, of course."
Of course.
"You were
amazing," Elend said. "I'd be dead right now if you hadn't
stopped those Allomancers—and it's likely that Penrod and the
other Assemblymen would have fared the same. You saved the Central
Dominance."
We always have
to be the knives . . . .
Elend smiled,
standing. "Here," he said, walking to the side of the room.
"This is cold, but Sazed said you should eat it when you awoke."
He returned with a bowl of broth.
"Sazed sent
it?" Vin asked skeptically. "Drugged, then?"
Elend smiled. "He
warned me not to taste it myself—he said it was filled with
enough sedatives to knock me out for a month. It takes a lot to
affect you pewter burners."
He set the bowl on
the bedstand. Vin eyed it through narrowed eyes. Sazed was probably
worried that, despite her wounds, she'd go out and prowl the city if
she were left on her own. He was probably right. With a sigh, Vin
accepted the bowl and began to sip at it.
Elend smiled. "I'll
send someone to bring you more coal for the stove," he said.
"There are some things I need to do."
Vin nodded, and he
left, pulling the door shut behind him.
When Vin next
awoke, she saw that Elend was still there. He stood in the shadows,
watching her. It was still dark outside. The shutters to her window
were open, and mist coated the floor of the room.
The shutters were
open.
Vin sat upright and
turned toward the figure in the corner. It wasn't Elend. "Zane,"
she said flatly.
He stepped forward.
It was so easy to see the similarities between him and Elend, now
that she knew what to look for. They had the same jaw, the same wavy
dark hair. They even had similar builds, now that Elend had been
exercising.
"You sleep too
soundly," Zane said.
"Even a
Mistborn's body needs sleep to heal."
"You shouldn't
have been hurt in the first place," Zane said. "You should
have been able to kill those men with ease, but you were distracted
by my brother, and by trying to keep the people of the room from
harm. This is what he's done to you—he's changed you, so
that you no longer see what needs to be done, you just see what he
wants you to do."
Vin raised an
eyebrow, quietly feeling beneath her pillow. Her dagger was there,
fortunately. He didn't kill me in my sleep, she thought. That
has to be a good sign.
He took another
step forward. She tensed. "What is your game, Zane?" she
said. "First, you tell me that you've decided not to kill
me—then you send a group of assassins. What now? Have you come
to finish the job?"
"We didn't
send those assassins, Vin," Zane said quietly.
Vin snorted.
"Believe as
you wish," Zane said, taking another step forward so that he
stood right beside her bed, a tall figure of blackness and solemnity.
"But, my father is still terrified of you. Why would he risk
retribution by trying to kill Elend?"
"It was a
gamble," Vin said. "He hoped those assassins would kill
me."
"Why use
them?" Zane asked. "He has me—why use a bunch of
Mistings to attack you in the middle of a crowded room, when he could
just have me use atium in the night and kill you?"
Vin hesitated.
"Vin," he
said, "I watched the corpses being carried away from the
Assembly Hall, and I recognized some of them from Cett's entourage."
That's it!
Vin thought. That's where I saw that Thug whose face I smashed! He
was at Keep Hasting, peeking out from the kitchen while we ate with
Cett, pretending to be a servant.
"But, the
assassins attacked Cett too . . . " Vin trailed off. It was
basic thieving strategy: if you had a front that you wanted to escape
suspicion as you burgled the shops around it, you made certain to
"steal" from yourself as well.
"The assassins
who attacked Cett were all normal men," Vin said. "No
Allomancers. I wonder what he told them—that they'd be allowed
to 'surrender' once the battle turned? But why fake an attack in the
first place? He was favored for the throne."
Zane shook his
head. "Penrod made a deal with my father, Vin. Straff offered
the Assembly wealth beyond anything Cett could provide. That's why
the merchants changed their votes. Cett must have gotten wind of
their betrayal. He has spies enough in the city."
Vin sat,
dumbfounded. Of course! "And the only way that Cett could
see to win . . . "
"Was to send
the assassins," Zane said with a nod. "They were to attack
all three candidates, killing Penrod and Elend, but leaving Cett
alive. The Assembly would assume that they'd been betrayed by Straff,
and Cett would become king."
Vin gripped her
knife with a shaking hand. She was growing tired of games. Elend had
almost died. She had almost failed.
Part of her, a
burning part, wanted to do what she'd first been inclined to. To go
out and kill Cett and Straff, to remove the danger the most efficient
way possible.
No, she told
herself forcefully. No, that was Kelsier's way. It's not my way.
It's not . . . Elend's way.
Zane turned away,
facing toward her window, staring at the small waterfall-like flow of
mist spilling through. "I should have arrived sooner to the
fight. I was outside, with the crowds that came too late to get a
seat. I didn't even know what was happening until the people started
piling out."
Vin raised an
eyebrow. "You almost sound sincere, Zane."
"I have no
wish to see you dead," he said, turning. "And I certainly
don't want to see harm befall Elend."
"Oh?" Vin
asked. "Even though he's the one who had all the privileges,
while you were despised and kept locked away?"
Zane shook his
head. "It isn't like that. Elend is . . . pure. Sometimes—when
I hear him speak—I wonder if I would have become like him, if
my childhood had been different."
He met her eyes in
the dark room. "I'm . . . broken, Vin. Maddened. I can never be
like Elend. But, killing him wouldn't change me. It's probably best
that he and I were raised apart—it's far better that he doesn't
know about me. Better that he remain as he is. Untainted."
"I . . . "
Vin floundered. What could she say? She could see actual sincerity in
Zane's eyes.
"I'm not
Elend," Zane said. "I never will be—I'm not a part of
his world. But, I don't think that I should be. Neither should
you. After the fighting was done, I finally got into the Assembly
Hall. I saw Elend standing over you, at the end. I saw the look in
his eyes."
She turned away.
"It's not his
fault that he is what he is," Zane said. "As I said, he's
pure. But, that makes him different from us. I've tried to explain it
to you. I wish you could have seen that look in his eyes . . . ."
I saw it,
Vin thought. She didn't want to remember it, but she had seen
it. That awful look of horror, a reaction to something terrible and
alien, something beyond understanding.
"I can't be
Elend," Zane said quietly, "but you don't want me to be."
He reached over and dropped something on her bedstand. "Next
time, be prepared."
Vin snatched the
object as Zane began to walk toward the window. The ball of metal
rolled in her palm. The shape was bumpy, but the texture was
smooth—like a nugget of gold. She knew it without having to
swallow it. "Atium?"
"Cett may send
other assassins," Zane said, hopping up onto the windowsill.
"You're giving
it to me?" she asked. "There's enough here for a good two
minutes of burning!" It was a small fortune, easily worth twenty
thousand boxings before the Collapse. Now, with the scarcity of atium
. . .
Zane turned back
toward her. "Just keep yourself safe," he said, then
launched himself out into the mists.
Vin did not like
being injured. Logically, she knew that other people probably felt
the same way; after all, who would enjoy pain and debilitation? Yet,
when the others got sick, she sensed frustration from them. Not
terror.
When sick, Elend
would spend the day in bed, reading books. Clubs had taken a bad blow
during practice several months before, and he had grumbled about the
pain, but had stayed off his leg for a few days without much
prodding.
Vin was growing to
be more like them. She could lie in bed as she did now, knowing that
nobody would try to slit her throat while she was too weak to call
for help. Still, she itched to rise, to show that she wasn't very
badly wounded. Lest someone think otherwise, and try to take
advantage.
It isn't like
that anymore! she told herself. It was light outside, and though
Elend had been back to visit several times, he was currently away.
Sazed had come to check on her wounds, and had begged her to stay in
bed for "at least one more day." Then he'd gone back to his
studies. With Tindwyl.
What ever
happened to those two hating each other? she thought with
annoyance. I barely get to see him.
Her door opened.
Vin was pleased that her instincts were still keen enough that she
immediately grew tense, reaching for her daggers. Her pained side
protested the sudden motion.
Nobody entered.
Vin frowned, still
tense, until a canine head popped up over the top of her footboard.
"Mistress?" said a familiar, half growl of a voice.
"OreSeur?"
Vin said. "You're wearing another dog's body!"
"Of course,
Mistress," OreSeur said, hopping up onto the bed. "What
else would I have?"
"I don't
know," Vin said, putting away her daggers. "When Elend said
you'd had him get you a body, I just assumed that you'd asked for a
human. I mean, everyone saw my 'dog' die."
"Yes,"
OreSeur said, "but it will be simple to explain that you got a
new animal. You are expected to have a dog with you now, and so not
having one would provoke notice."
Vin sat quietly.
She'd changed back to trousers and shirt, despite Sazed's protests.
Her dresses hung in the other room, one noticeably absent. At times,
when she looked at them, she thought she saw the gorgeous white gown
hanging there, sprayed with blood. Tindwyl had been wrong: Vin
couldn't be both Mistborn and lady. The horror she had seen in the
eyes of the Assemblymen was enough proof for her.
"You didn't
need to take a dog's body, OreSeur," Vin said quietly. "I'd
rather that you were happy."
"It is all
right, Mistress," OreSeur said. "I have grown . . . fond of
these kinds of bones. I should like to explore their advantages a
little more before I return to human ones."
Vin smiled. He'd
chosen another wolfhound—a big brute of a beast. The colorings
were different: more black than gray, without any patches of white.
She approved.
"OreSeur . . .
" Vin said, looking away. "Thank you for what you did for
me."
"I fulfill my
Contract."
"I've been in
other fights," Vin said. "You never intervened in those."
OreSeur didn't
answer immediately. "No, I didn't."
"Why this
time?"
"I did what
felt right, Mistress," OreSeur said.
"Even if it
contradicted the Contract?"
OreSeur sat up
proudly on his haunches. "I did not break my Contract,"
he said firmly.
"But you
attacked a human."
"I didn't kill
him," OreSeur said. "We are cautioned to stay out of
combat, lest we accidentally cause a human death. Indeed, most of my
brethren think that helping someone kill is the same as killing, and
feel it is a breach of the Contract. The words are distinct, however.
I did nothing wrong."
"And if that
man you tackled had broken his neck?"
"Then I would
have returned to my kind for execution," OreSeur said.
Vin smiled. "Then
you did risk your life for me."
"In a small
way, I suppose," OreSeur said. "The chances of my actions
directly causing that man's death were slim."
"Thank you
anyway."
OreSeur bowed his
head in acceptance.
"Executed,"
Vin said. "So you can be killed?"
"Of course,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "We aren't immortal."
Vin eyed him.
"I will say
nothing specific, Mistress," OreSeur said. "As you might
imagine, I would rather not reveal the weaknesses of my kind. Please
suffice it to say that they exist."
Vin nodded, but
frowned in thought, bringing her knees up to her chest. Something was
still bothering her, something about what Elend had said earlier,
something about OreSeur's actions . . . .
"But,"
she said slowly, "you couldn't have been killed by swords or
staves, right?"
"Correct,"
OreSeur said. "Though our flesh looks like yours, and though we
feel pain, beating us has no permanent effect."
"Then why are
you afraid?" Vin said, finally lighting upon what was bothering
her.
"Mistress?"
"Why did your
people make the Contract?" Vin asked. "Why subjugate
yourselves to mankind? If our soldiers couldn't hurt you, then why
even worry about us?"
"You have
Allomancy," OreSeur said.
"So, Allomancy
can kill you?"
"No,"
OreSeur said, shaking his canine head. "It cannot. But, perhaps
we should change the topic. I'm sorry, Mistress. This is very
dangerous ground for me."
"I
understand," Vin said, sighing. "It's just so frustrating.
There's so much I don't know—about the Deepness, about the
legal politics . . . even about my own friends!" She sat back,
looking up at the ceiling. And there's still a spy in the
palace. Demoux or Dockson, likely. Maybe I should just order them
both taken and held for a time? Would Elend even do such a thing?
OreSeur was
watching her, apparently noting her frustration. Finally, he sighed.
"Perhaps there are some things I can speak of, Mistress, if I am
careful. What do you know of the origin of the kandra?"
Vin perked up.
"Nothing."
"We did not
exist before the Ascension," he said.
"You mean to
say that the Lord Ruler created you?"
"That is what
our lore teaches," OreSeur said. "We are not certain of our
purpose. Perhaps we were to be Father's spies."
"Father?"
Vin said. "It seems strange to hear him spoken of that way."
"The Lord
Ruler created us, Mistress," OreSeur said. "We are his
children."
"And I killed
him," Vin said. "I . . . feel like I should apologize."
"Just because
he is our Father does not mean we accepted everything he did,
Mistress," OreSeur said. "Cannot a human man love his
father, yet not believe he is a good person?"
"I suppose."
"Kandra
theology about Father is complex," OreSeur said. "Even for
us, it is difficult to sort through it sometimes."
Vin frowned.
"OreSeur? How old are you?"
"Old," he
said simply.
"Older than
Kelsier?"
"Much,"
OreSeur. "But not as old as you are thinking. I do not remember
the Ascension."
Vin nodded. "Why
tell me all of this?"
"Because of
your original question, Mistress. Why do we serve the Contract? Well,
tell me—if you were the Lord Ruler, and had his power, would
you have created servants without building into them a way that you
could control them?"
Vin nodded slowly
in understanding.
"Father took
little thought of the kandra from about the second century after his
Ascension," OreSeur said. "We tried to be independent for a
time, but it was as I explained, humankind resented us. Feared us.
And, some of them knew of our weaknesses. When my ancestors
considered their options, they eventually chose voluntary servitude
as opposed to forced slavery."
He created them,
Vin thought. She had always shared a bit of Kelsier's view regarding
the Lord Ruler—that he was more man than deity. But, if he'd
truly created a completely new species, then there had to have been
some divinity in him.
The power of the
Well of Ascension, she thought. He took it for himself—but
it didn't last. It must have run out, and quickly. Otherwise, why
would he have needed armies to conquer?
An initial burst of
power, the ability to create, to change—perhaps to save. He'd
pushed back the mists, and in the process he'd somehow made the ash
begin to fall and the sky turn red. He'd created the kandra to serve
him—and probably the koloss, too. He might even have created
Allomancers themselves.
And after that, he
had returned to being a normal man. Mostly. The Lord Ruler had still
held an inordinate amount of power for an Allomancer, and had managed
to keep control of his creations—and he had somehow kept the
mists from killing.
Until Vin had slain
him. Then the koloss had begun to rampage, and the mists had
returned. The kandra hadn't been beneath his control at that time, so
they remained as they were. But, he built into them a method of
control, should he need it. A way to make the kandra serve him . . .
.
Vin closed her
eyes, and quested out lightly with her Allomantic senses. OreSeur had
said that kandra couldn't be affected by Allomancy—but she knew
something else about the Lord Ruler, something that had distinguished
him from other Allomancers. His inordinate power had allowed him to
do things he shouldn't have been able to.
Things like pierce
copperclouds, and affect metals inside of a person's body. Maybe that
was how he controlled the kandra, the thing that OreSeur was speaking
of. The reason they feared Mistborn.
Not because
Mistborn could kill them, but because Mistborn could do something
else. Enslave them, somehow. Tentatively, testing what he'd said
earlier, Vin reached out with a Soothing and touched OreSeur's
emotions. Nothing happened.
I can do some of
the same things as the Lord Ruler, she thought. I can pierce
copperclouds. Perhaps, if I just Push harder . . .
She focused, and
Pushed on his emotions with a powerful Soothing. Again,
nothing happened. Just as he'd told her. She sat for a moment. And
then, impulsively, she burned duralumin and tried one final, massive
Push.
OreSeur immediately
let out a howl so bestial and unexpected that Vin jumped to her feet
in shock, flaring pewter.
OreSeur fell to the
bed, shaking.
"OreSeur!"
she said, dropping to her knees, grabbing his head. "I'm sorry!"
"Said too much
. . . " he muttered, still shaking. "I knew I'd said too
much."
"I didn't mean
to hurt you," Vin said.
The shaking
subsided, and OreSeur fell still for a moment, breathing quietly.
Finally, he pulled his head out of her arms. "What you meant is
immaterial, Mistress," he said flatly. "The mistake was
mine. Please, never do that again."
"I promise,"
she said. "I'm sorry."
He shook his head,
crawling off the bed. "You shouldn't even have been able to do
it. There are strange things about you, Mistress—you are like
the Allomancers of old, before the passage of generations dulled
their powers."
"I'm sorry,"
Vin said again, feeling helpless. He saved my life, nearly broke
his Contract, and I do this to him . . . .
OreSeur shrugged.
"It is done. I need to rest. I suggest that you do the same."
After that, I
began to see other problems.





41
"'I WRITE THIS
RECORD NOW,'" Sazed read out loud, "'pounding it into a
metal slab, because I am afraid. Afraid for myself, yes—I admit
to being human. If Alendi does return from the Well of Ascension, I
am certain that my death will be one of his first objectives. He is
not an evil man, but he is a ruthless one. That is, I think, a
product of what he has been through.'"
"That fits
what we know of Alendi from the logbook," Tindwyl said.
"Assuming that Alendi is that book's author."
Sazed glanced at
his pile of notes, running over the basics in his mind. Kwaan had
been an ancient Terris scholar. He had discovered Alendi, a man he
began to think—through his studies—might be the Hero of
Ages, a figure from Terris prophecy. Alendi had listened to him, and
had become a political leader. He had conquered much of the world,
then traveled north to the Well of Ascension. By then, however, Kwaan
had apparently changed his mind about Alendi—and had tried to
stop him from getting to the Well.
It fit together.
Even though the logbook author never mentioned his own name, it was
obvious that he was Alendi. "It is a very safe assumption, I
think," Sazed said. "The logbook even speaks of Kwaan, and
the falling-out they had."
They sat beside
each other in Sazed's rooms. He had requested, and received, a larger
desk to hold their multitudinous notes and scribbled theories. Beside
the door sat the remnants of their afternoon meal, a soup they had
hurriedly gulped down. Sazed itched to take the dishes down to the
kitchens, but he hadn't been able to pull himself away yet.
"Continue,"
Tindwyl requested, sitting back in her chair, looking more relaxed
than Sazed had ever seen her. The rings running down the sides of her
ears alternated in color—a gold or copper followed by a tin or
iron. It was such a simple thing, but there was a beauty to it.
"Sazed?"
Sazed started. "I
apologize," he said, then turned back to his reading. "'I
am also afraid, however, that all I have known—that my
story—will be forgotten. I am afraid for the world that may
come. Afraid because my plans failed. Afraid of a doom brought by the
Deepness.'"
"Wait,"
Tindwyl said. "Why did he fear that?"
"Why would he
not?" Sazed asked. "The Deepness—which we assume is
the mist—was killing his people. Without sunlight, their crops
would not grow, and their animals could not graze."
"But, if Kwaan
feared the Deepness, then he should not have opposed Alendi,"
Tindwyl said. "He was climbing to the Well of Ascension to
defeat the Deepness."
"Yes,"
Sazed said. "But by then, Kwaan was convinced that Alendi wasn't
the Hero of Ages."
"But why would
that matter?" Tindwyl said. "It didn't take a specific
person to stop the mists—Rashek's success proves that. Here,
skip to the end. Read that passage about Rashek."
"'I have a
young nephew, one Rashek,'" Sazed read. "'He hates all of
Khlennium with the passion of envious youth. He hates Alendi even
more acutely—though the two have never met—for Rashek
feels betrayed that one of our oppressors should have been chosen as
the Hero of Ages.
"'Alendi will
need guides through the Terris mountains. I have charged Rashek with
making certain that he and his trusted friends are chosen as those
guides. Rashek is to try and lead Alendi in the wrong direction, to
discourage him or otherwise foil his quest. Alendi won't know that he
has been deceived.
"'If Rashek
fails to lead Alendi astray, then I have instructed the lad to kill
my former friend. It is a distant hope. Alendi has survived
assassins, wars, and catastrophes. And yet, I hope that in the frozen
mountains of Terris, he may finally be exposed. I hope for a miracle.
"'Alendi must
not reach the Well of Ascension. He must not take the power for
himself.'"
Tindwyl sat back,
frowning.
"What?"
"Something is
wrong there, I think," she said. "But I cannot tell you
precisely what."
Sazed scanned the
text again. "Let us break it down to simple statements, then.
Rashek—the man who became the Lord Ruler—was Kwaan's
nephew."
"Yes,"
Tindwyl said.
"Kwaan sent
Rashek to mislead, or even kill, his once-friend Alendi the
Conqueror—a man climbing the mountains of Terris to seek the
Well of Ascension."
Tindwyl nodded.
"Kwaan did
this because he feared what would happen if Alendi took the Well's
power for himself."
Tindwyl raised a
finger. "Why did he fear that?"
"It seems a
rational fear, I think," Sazed said.
"Too
rational," Tindwyl replied. "Or, rather, perfectly
rational. But, tell me, Sazed. When you read Alendi's logbook, did
you get the impression that he was the type who would take that power
for himself?"
Sazed shook his
head. "Actually, the opposite. That is part of what made the
logbook so confusing—we couldn't figure out why the man
represented within would have done as we assumed he must have. I
think that is part of what eventually led Vin to guess that the Lord
Ruler wasn't Alendi at all, but Rashek, his packman."
"And Kwaan
says that he knew Alendi well," Tindwyl said. "In fact, in
this very rubbing, he compliments the man on several occasions. Calls
him a good person, I believe."
"Yes,"
Sazed said, finding the passage. "'He is a good man—despite
it all, he is a good man. A sacrificing man. In truth, all of his
actions—all of the deaths, destructions, and pains that he has
caused—have hurt him deeply.'"
"So, Kwaan
knew Alendi well," Tindwyl said. "And thought highly of
him. He also, presumably, knew his nephew Rashek well. Do you see my
problem?"
Sazed nodded
slowly. "Why send a man of wild temperament, one whose
motivations are based on envy and hatred, to kill a man you thought
to be good and of worthy temperament? It does seem an odd choice."
"Exactly,"
Tindwyl said, resting her arms on the table.
"But,"
Sazed said, "Kwaan says right here that he 'doubts that if
Alendi reaches the Well of Ascension, he will take the power and
then—in the name of the greater good—give it up.'"
Tindwyl shook her
head. "It doesn't make sense, Sazed. Kwaan wrote several times
about how he feared the Deepness, but then he tried to foil the hope
of stopping it by sending a hateful youth to kill a respected, and
presumably wise, leader. Kwaan practically set up Rashek to
take the power—if letting Alendi take the power was such a
concern, wouldn't he have feared that Rashek might do the same?"
"Perhaps we
simply see things with the clarity of those regarding events that
have already occurred," Sazed said.
Tindwyl shook her
head. "We're missing something, Sazed. Kwaan is a very rational,
even deliberate, man—one can tell that from his narrative. He
was the one who discovered Alendi, and was the first to tout him as
the Hero of Ages. Why would he turn against him as he did?"
Sazed nodded,
flipping through his translation of the rubbing. Kwaan had gained
much notoriety by discovering the Hero. He found the place he was
looking for.
There was a
place for me in the lore of the Anticipation, the text read. I
thought myself the Announcer, the prophet foretold to discover the
Hero of Ages. Renouncing Alendi then would have been to renounce my
new position, my acceptance, by the others.
"Something
dramatic must have happened," Tindwyl said. "Something that
would make him turn against his friend, the source of his own fame.
Something that pricked his conscience so sharply that he was willing
to risk opposing the most powerful monarch in the land. Something so
frightening that he took a ridiculous chance by sending this Rashek
on an assassination mission."
Sazed leafed
through his notes. "He fears both the Deepness and what would
happen if Alendi took the power. Yet, he cannot seem to decide which
one is the greater threat, and neither seems more present in the
narrative than the other. Yes, I can see the problem here. Do you
think, perhaps, Kwaan was trying to imply something by the
inconsistency in his own arguments?"
"Perhaps,"
Tindwyl said. "The information is just so slim. I cannot judge a
man without knowing the context of his life!"
Sazed looked up,
eyeing her. "Perhaps we have been studying too hard," he
said. "Shall we take a break?"
Tindwyl shook her
head. "We don't have the time, Sazed."
He met her eyes.
She was right on that point.
"You sense it
too, don't you?" she asked.
He nodded. "This
city will soon fall. The forces pressing upon it . . . the armies,
the koloss, the civil confusion . . . "
"I fear it
will be more violent than your friends hope, Sazed," Tindwyl
said quietly. "They seem to believe that they can just continue
to juggle their problems."
"They are an
optimistic group," he said with a smile. "Unaccustomed to
being defeated."
"This will be
worse than the revolution," Tindwyl said. "I have studied
these things, Sazed. I know what happens when a conqueror takes a
city. People will die. Many people."
Sazed felt a chill
at her words. There was a tension to Luthadel; war was coming to the
city. Perhaps one army or another would enter by the blessing of the
Assembly, but the other would still strike. The walls of Luthadel
would run red when the siege finally ended.
And he feared that
end was coming very, very soon.
"You are
right," he said, turning back to the notes on his desktop. "We
must continue to study. We should collect more of what we can find
about the land before the Ascension, so that you may have the context
you seek."
She nodded, showing
a fatalistic resolve. This was not a task they could complete in the
time they had. Deciphering the meaning of the rubbing, comparing it
to the logbook, and relating it to the context of the period was a
scholarly undertaking that would require the determined work of
years.
Keepers had much
knowledge—but in this case, it was almost too much. They had
been gathering and transmitting records, stories, myths, and legends
for so long that it took years for one Keeper to recite the collected
works to a new initiate.
Fortunately,
included with the mass of information were indexes and summaries
created by the Keepers. On top of this came the notes and personal
indexes each individual Keeper made. And yet, these only helped the
Keeper understand just how much information he had. Sazed himself had
spent his life reading, memorizing, and indexing religions. Each
night, before he slept, he read some portion of a note or story. He
was probably the world's foremost scholar on pre-Ascension religions,
and yet he felt as if he knew so little.
Compounding all of
that was the inherent unreliability of their information. A great
deal of it came from the mouths of simple people, doing their best to
remember what their lives had once been like—or, more often,
what the lives of their grandparents had once been like. The Keepers
hadn't been founded until late in the second century of the Lord
Ruler's reign. By then, many religions had already been wiped out in
their pure forms.
Sazed closed his
eyes, dumped another index from a coppermind into his head, then
began to search it. There wasn't much time, true, but Tindwyl and he
were Keepers. They were accustomed to beginning tasks that others
would have to finish.
Elend Venture, once
king of the Central Dominance, stood on the balcony of his keep,
overlooking the vast city of Luthadel. Though the first snows had yet
to fall, the weather had grown cold. He wore an overcloak, tied at
the front, but it didn't protect his face. A chill tingled his cheeks
as a wind blew across him, whipping at his cloak. Smoke rose from
chimneys, gathering like an ominous shadow above the city before
rising up to meld with the ashen red sky.
For every house
that produced smoke, there were two that did not. Many of those were
probably deserted; the city held nowhere near the population it once
had. However, he knew that many of those smokeless houses were still
inhabited. Inhabited, and freezing.
I should have
been able to do more for them, Elend thought, eyes open to the
piercing cold wind. I should have found a way to get more coal; I
should have managed to provide for them all.
It was humbling,
even depressing, to admit that the Lord Ruler had done better than
Elend himself. Despite being a heartless tyrant, the Lord Ruler had
at least kept a significant portion of the population from starving
or freezing. He had kept armies in check, and had kept crime at a
manageable level.
To the northeast,
the koloss army waited. It had sent no emissaries to the city, but it
was more frightening than either Cett's or Straff's armies. The cold
wouldn't scare away its occupants; despite their bare skin, they
apparently took little notice of weather changes. This final army was
the most disturbing of the three—more dangerous, more
unpredictable, and impossible to deal with. Koloss did not bargain.
We haven't been
paying enough attention to that threat, he thought as he stood on
the balcony. There's just been so much to do, so much to worry
about, that we couldn't focus on an army that might be as dangerous
to our enemies as it is to us.
It was looking less
and less likely that the koloss would attack Cett or Straff.
Apparently, Jastes was enough in control to keep them waiting to take
a shot at Luthadel itself.
"My lord,"
said a voice from behind. "Please, come back in. That's a fell
wind. No use killing yourself from a chill."
Elend turned back.
Captain Demoux stood dutifully in the room, along with another
bodyguard. In the aftermath of the assassination attempt, Ham had
insisted that Elend go about guarded. Elend hadn't complained, though
he knew there was little reason for caution anymore. Straff wouldn't
want to kill him now that he wasn't king.
So earnest,
Elend thought, studying Demoux's face. Why do I find him youthful?
We're nearly the same age.
"Very well,"
Elend said, turning and striding into the room. As Demoux closed the
balcony doors, Elend removed his cloak. The suit below felt wrong on
him. Sloppy, even though he had ordered it cleaned and pressed. The
vest was too tight—his practice with the sword was slowly
modifying his body—while the coat hung loosely.
"Demoux,"
Elend said. "When is your next Survivor rally?"
"Tonight, my
lord."
Elend nodded. He'd
feared that; it would be a cold night.
"My lord,"
Demoux said, "do you still intend to come?"
"Of course,"
Elend said. "I gave my word that I would join with your cause."
"That was
before you lost the vote, my lord."
"That is
immaterial," Elend said. "I am joining your movement
because it is important to the skaa, Demoux, and I want to understand
the will of my . . . of the people. I promised you dedication—and
you shall have it."
Demoux seemed a bit
confused, but spoke no further. Elend eyed his desk, considering some
studying, but found it hard to motivate himself in the chill room.
Instead, he pushed open the door and strode out into the hallway. His
guards followed.
He stopped himself
from turning toward Vin's rooms. She needed her rest, and it didn't
do her much good to have him peeking in every half hour to check on
her. So instead he turned to wander down a different passageway.
The back hallways
of Keep Venture were tight, dark, stone constructions of labyrinthine
complexity. Perhaps it was because he'd grown up in these passages,
but he felt at home in their dark, secluded confines. They had been
the perfect place for a young man who didn't really care to be found.
Now he used them for another reason; the corridors provided a perfect
place for extended walking. He didn't point himself in any particular
direction, he just moved, working out his frustration to the beating
of his own footsteps.
I can't fix the
city's problems, he told himself. I have to let Penrod handle
that—he's the one the people want.
That should have
made things easier for Elend. It let him focus on his own survival,
not to mention let him spend time revitalizing his relationship with
Vin. She, however, seemed different lately. Elend tried to tell
himself it was just her injury, but he sensed something deeper.
Something in the way she looked at him, something in the way she
reacted to his affection. And, despite himself, he could think of
only one thing that had changed.
He was no longer
king.
Vin was not
shallow. She had shown him nothing but devotion and love during their
two years together. And yet, how could she not react—even if
unconsciously—to his colossal failure? During the assassination
attempt, he had watched her fight. Really watched her fight,
for the first time. Until that day, he hadn't realized just how
amazing she was. She wasn't just a warrior, and she wasn't just an
Allomancer. She was a force, like thunder or wind. The way she had
killed that last man, smashing his head with her own . . .
How could she
love a man like me? he thought. I couldn't even hold my
throne. I wrote the very laws that deposed me.
He sighed,
continuing to walk. He felt like he should be scrambling, trying to
figure out a way to convince Vin that he was worthy of her. But that
would just make him seem more incompetent. There was no correcting
past mistakes, especially since he could see no real "mistakes"
he had made. He had done the best he could, and that had proven
insufficient.
He paused at an
intersection. Once, a relaxing dip into a book would have been enough
to calm him. Now he felt nervous. Tense. A little . . . like he
assumed Vin usually felt.
Maybe I could
learn from her, he thought. What would Vin do in my situation?
She certainly wouldn't just wander around, brooding and feeling sorry
for herself. Elend frowned, looking down a hallway lighted by
flickering oil lamps, only half of them lit. Then he took off, waking
with a determined stride toward a particular set of rooms.
He knocked quietly,
and got no response. Finally, he poked his head in. Sazed and Tindwyl
sat quietly before a desk piled high with scraps of paper and
ledgers. They both sat staring, as if at nothing, their eyes bearing
the glazedover look of someone who had been stunned. Sazed's hand
rested on the table. Tindwyl's rested on top of it.
Sazed shook himself
alert suddenly, turning to regard Elend. "Lord Venture! I am
sorry. I did not hear you enter."
"It's all
right, Saze," Elend said, walking into the room. As he did,
Tindwyl shook awake as well, and she removed her hand from Sazed's.
Elend nodded to Demoux and his companion—who were still
following—indicating that they should remain outside, then
closed the door.
"Elend,"
Tindwyl said, her voice laced with its typical undercurrent of
displeasure. "What is your purpose in bothering us? You have
already proven your incompetence quite soundly—I see no need
for further discussion."
"This is still
my home, Tindwyl," Elend replied. "Insult me again, and you
will find yourself ejected from the premises."
Tindwyl raised an
eyebrow.
Sazed paled. "Lord
Venture," he said quickly, "I don't think that Tindwyl
meant to—"
"It's all
right, Sazed," Elend said, raising a hand. "She was just
testing to see if I had reverted back to my previous state of
insultability."
Tindwyl shrugged.
"I have heard reports of your moping through the palace hallways
like a lost child."
"Those reports
are true," Elend said. "But that doesn't mean that my pride
is completely gone."
"Good,"
Tindwyl said, nodding to a chair. "Seat yourself, if you wish."
Elend nodded,
pulling the chair over before the two and sitting. "I need
advice."
"I've given
you what I can already," Tindwyl said. "In fact, I've
perhaps given you too much. My continued presence here makes it seem
that I'm taking sides."
"I'm not king
anymore," Elend said. "Therefore, I have no side. I'm just
a man seeking truth."
Tindwyl smiled.
"Ask your questions, then."
Sazed watched the
exchange with obvious interest.
I know,
Elend thought, I'm not sure I understand our relationship either.
"Here is my problem," he said. "I lost the throne,
essentially, because I wasn't willing to lie."
"Explain,"
Tindwyl said.
"I had a
chance to obscure a piece of the law," Elend said. "At the
last moment, I could have made the Assembly take me as king. Instead,
I gave them a bit of information that was true, but which ended up
costing me the throne."
"I'm not
surprised," Tindwyl said.
"I doubted
that you would be," Elend said. "Now, do you think I was
foolish to do as I did?"
"Yes."
Elend nodded.
"But,"
Tindwyl said, "that moment isn't what cost you the throne, Elend
Venture. That moment was a small thing, far too simple to credit with
your large-scale failure. You lost the throne because you wouldn't
command your armies to secure the city, because you insisted on
giving the Assembly too much freedom, and because you don't employ
assassins or other forms of pressure. In short, Elend Venture, you
lost the throne because you are a good man."
Elend shook his
head. "Can you not be both a man who follows his conscience and
a good king, then?"
Tindwyl frowned in
thought.
"You ask an
age-old question, Elend," Sazed said quietly. "A question
that monarchs, priests, and humble men of destiny have always asked.
I do not know that there is an answer."
"Should I have
told the lie, Sazed?" Elend asked.
"No,"
Sazed said, smiling. "Perhaps another man should have, in your
same position. But, a man must be cohesive with himself. You have
made your decisions in life, and changing yourself at the last
moment—telling this lie—would have been against who you
are. It is better for you to have done as you did and lost the
throne, I think."
Tindwyl frowned.
"His ideals are nice, Sazed. But what of the people? What if
they die because Elend wasn't capable of controlling his own
conscience?"
"I do not wish
to argue with you, Tindwyl," Sazed said. "It is simply my
opinion that he chose well. It is his right to follow his conscience,
then trust in providence to fill in the holes caused by the conflict
between morality and logic."
Providence.
"You mean God," Elend said.
"I do."
Elend shook his
head. "What is God, Sazed, but a device used by obligators?"
"Why do you
make the choices that you do, Elend Venture?"
"Because
they're right," Elend said.
"And why are
these things right?"
"I don't
know," Elend said with a sigh, leaning back. He caught a
disapproving glance from Tindwyl at his posture, but he ignored her.
He wasn't king; he could slouch if he wanted to. "You talk of
God, Sazed, but don't you preach of a hundred different religions?"
"Three
hundred, actually," Sazed said.
"Well, which
one do you believe?" Elend asked.
"I believe
them all."
Elend shook his
head. "That doesn't make sense. You've only pitched a half-dozen
to me, but I can already see that they're incompatible."
"It is not my
position to judge truth, Lord Venture," Sazed said, smiling. "I
simply carry it."
Elend sighed.
Priests . . . he thought. Sometimes, talking to Sazed is
like talking to an obligator.
"Elend,"
Tindwyl said, her tone softening. "I think you handled this
situation in the wrong way. However, Sazed does have a point. You
were true to your own convictions, and that is a regal attribute, I
think."
"And what
should I do now?" he asked.
"Whatever you
wish," Tindwyl said. "It was never my place to tell you
what to do. I simply gave you knowledge of what men in your place did
in the past."
"And what
would they have done?" Elend asked. "These great leaders of
yours, how would they have reacted to my situation?"
"It is a
meaningless question," she said. "They would not have found
themselves in this situation, for they would not have lost their
titles in the first place."
"Is that what
it's about, then?" Elend asked. "The title?"
"Isn't that
what we were discussing?" Tindwyl asked.
Elend didn't
answer. What do you think makes a man a good king? he had once
asked of Tindwyl. Trust, she had replied. A good king is
one who is trusted by his people—and one who deserves that
trust.
Elend stood up.
"Thank you, Tindwyl," he said.
Tindwyl frowned in
confusion, then turned to Sazed. He looked up and met Elend's eyes,
cocking his head slightly. Then he smiled. "Come, Tindwyl,"
he said. "We should return to our studies. His Majesty has work
to do, I think."
Tindwyl continued
to frown as Elend left the room. His guards followed behind as he
quickly strode down the hallway.
I won't go back
to the way I was, Elend thought. I won't continue to fret and
worry. Tindwyl taught me better than that, even if she never really
understood me.
Elend arrived at
his rooms a few moments later. He stalked directly in, then opened
his closet. The clothing Tindwyl had chosen for him—the
clothing of a king—waited inside.
Some of you may
know of my fabled memory. It is true; I need not a Feruchemist's
metalmind to memorize a sheet of words in an instant.





42
"GOOD,"
ELEND SAID, USING A charcoal stick to circle another section on the
city map before him. "What about here?"
Demoux scratched
his chin. "Grainfield? That's a nobleman's neighborhood, my
lord."
"It used to
be," Elend said. "Grainfield was filled with cousin houses
to the Ventures. When my father pulled out of the city, so did most
of them."
"Then we'll
probably find the homes filled with skaa transients, I'd guess."
Elend nodded. "Move
them out."
"Excuse me, my
lord?" Demoux said. The two stood in Keep Venture's large
carriage landing. Soldiers moved in a bustle through the spacious
room. Many of them didn't wear uniforms; they weren't on official
city business. Elend was no longer king, but they had still come at
his request.
That said
something, at least.
"We need to
move the skaa out of those homes," Elend continued. "Noblemen's
houses are mostly stone mansions with a lot of small rooms. They're
extremely hard to heat, requiring a separate hearth or a stove for
every room. The skaa tenements are depressing, but they have massive
hearths and open rooms."
Demoux nodded
slowly.
"The Lord
Ruler couldn't have his workers freezing," Elend said. "Those
tenements are the best way to efficiently look after a large
population of people with limited resources."
"I understand,
my lord," Demoux said.
"Don't force
them, Demoux," Elend said. "My personal guard—even
augmented with army volunteers—has no official authority in the
city. If a family wants to stay in their pilfered aristocratic house,
let them. Just make certain that they know there's an alternative to
freezing."
Demoux nodded, then
moved over to pass on the commands. Elend turned as a messenger
arrived. The man had to weave his way through an organized jumble of
soldiers receiving orders and making plans.
Elend nodded to the
newcomer. "You're on the demolitions scout group, correct?"
The man nodded as
he bowed. He wasn't in uniform; he was a soldier, not one of Elend's
guards. He was a younger man, with a square jaw, balding head, and
honest smile.
"Don't I know
you?" Elend said.
"I helped you
a year ago, my lord," the man said. "I led you into the
Lord Ruler's palace to help rescue Lady Vin . . . ."
"Goradel,"
Elend said, remembering. "You used to be in the Lord Ruler's
personal guard."
The man nodded. "I
joined up in your army after that day. Seemed like the thing to do."
Elend smiled. "Not
my army anymore, Goradel, but I do appreciate you coming to help us
today. What's your report?"
"You were
right, my lord," Goradel said, "the skaa have already
robbed the empty homes for furniture. But, not many thought of the
walls. A good half of the abandoned mansions have wooden walls on the
inside, and a lot of the tenements were made of wood. Most all of
them have wooden roofs."
"Good,"
Elend said. He surveyed the gathering mass of men. He hadn't told
them his plans; he'd simply asked for volunteers to help him with
some manual labor. He hadn't expected the response to number in the
hundreds.
"It looks like
we're gathering quite a group, my lord," Demoux said, rejoining
Elend.
Elend nodded,
giving leave for Goradel to withdraw. "We'll be able to try an
even more ambitious project than I'd planned."
"My lord,"
Demoux said. "Are you certain you want to start tearing the city
down around ourselves?"
"We either
lose buildings or we lose people, Demoux," Elend said. "The
buildings go."
"And if the
king tries to stop us?"
"Then we
obey," Elend said. "But I don't think Lord Penrod will
object. He's too busy trying to get a bill through the Assembly that
hands the city over to my father. Besides, it's probably better for
him to have these men here, working, than it is to have them sitting
and worrying in the barracks."
Demoux fell silent.
Elend did as well; both knew how precarious their position was. Only
a short time had passed since the assassination attempt and the
transfer of power, and the city was in shock. Cett was still holed up
inside of Keep Hasting, and his armies had moved into position to
attack the city. Luthadel was like a man with a knife pressed very
closely to his throat. Each breath cut the skin.
I can't do much
about that now, Elend thought. I have to make certain the
people don't freeze these next few nights. He could feel the
bitter cold, despite the daylight, his cloak, and the shelter. There
were a lot of people in Luthadel, but if he could get enough men
tearing down enough buildings, he just might be able to do some good.
"My lord!"
Elend turned as a
short man with a drooping mustache approached. "Ah, Felt,"
he said. "You have news?" The man was working on the
poisoned-food problem—specifically how the city was being
breached.
The scout nodded.
"I do indeed, my lord. We interrogated the refugees with a
Rioter, and we came up dry. Then, however, I started thinking. The
refugees seemed too obvious to me. Strangers in the city? Of course
they'd be the first ones we'd suspect. I figured, with how much has
been going wrong with the wells and the food and the like, someone
has to be sneaking in and out of the city."
Elend nodded.
They'd been watching Cett's soldiers inside Keep Hasting very
carefully, and none of them was responsible. Straff's Mistborn was
still a possibility, but Vin had never believed that he was behind
the poisoning. Elend hoped that the trail—if it could be
found—would lead back to someone in his own palace, hopefully
revealing who on his serving staff had been replaced by a kandra.
"Well?"
Elend asked.
"I
interrogated the people who run passwalls," Felt continued. "I
don't think they're to blame."
"Passwalls?"
Felt nodded.
"Covert passages out of the city. Tunnels or the like."
"Such things
exist?" Elend asked with surprise.
"Of course, my
lord," Felt said. "Moving between cities was very difficult
for skaa thieves during the Lord Ruler's reign. Everyone who entered
Luthadel was subject to interview and interrogation. So, ways to get
into the city covertly were very prevalent. Most of those have shut
down—the ones who used to lower people up and down by ropes
over the walls. A few are still running, but I don't think they are
letting the spies in. Once that first well was poisoned, the
passwalls all got paranoid that you'd come after them. Since then,
they've only been letting people out of the city—ones
who want to run from the besieged city and the like."
Elend frowned. He
wasn't certain what he thought of the fact that people were
disobeying his order that the gates be shut, with no passage out.
"Next,"
Felt said, "I tried the river."
"We thought of
that," Elend said. "The grates covering the water are all
secure."
Felt smiled. "That
they are. I sent some men down under the water to search about, and
we found several locks down below, keeping the river grates in
place."
"What?"
"Someone pried
the grates free, my lord," Felt said, "then locked them
back into place so it wouldn't look suspicious. That way, they could
swim in and out at their leisure."
Elend raised an
eyebrow.
"You want us
to replace the grates?" Felt asked.
"No,"
Elend said. "No, just replace those locks with new ones, then
post men to watch. Next time those prisoners try and get into the
city, I want them to find themselves trapped."
Felt nodded,
retreating with a happy smile on his face. His talents as a spy
hadn't been put to much good use lately, and he seemed to be enjoying
the tasks Elend was giving him. Elend made a mental note to think
about putting Felt to work on locating the kandra spy—assuming,
of course, that Felt himself wasn't the spy.
"My lord,"
Demoux said, approaching. "I think I might be able to offer a
second opinion on how the poisonings are occurring."
Elend turned. "Oh?"
Demoux nodded,
waving for a man to approach from the side of the room. He was
younger, perhaps eighteen, and had the dirty face and clothing of a
skaa worker.
"This is
Larn," Demoux said. "A member of my congregation."
The young man bowed
to Elend, posture nervous.
"You may
speak, Larn," Demoux said. "Tell Lord Venture what you
saw."
"Well, my
lord," the young man said. "I tried to go tell this to the
king. The new king, I mean." He flushed, embarrassed.
"It's all
right," Elend said. "Continue."
"Well, the men
there turned me away. Said the king didn't have time for me. So, I
came to Lord Demoux. I figured he might believe me."
"About what?"
Elend asked.
"Inquisitor,
my lord," the man said quietly. "I saw one in the city."
Elend felt a chill.
"You're sure?"
The young man
nodded. "I've lived in Luthadel all my life, my lord. Watched
executions a number of times. I'd recognize one of those monsters,
sure I would. I saw him. Spikes through the eyes, tall and robed,
slinking about at night. Near the center squares of the city. I
promise you."
Elend shared a look
with Demoux.
"He's not the
only one, my lord," Demoux said quietly. "Some other
members of my congregation claimed to have seen an Inquisitor hanging
around Kredik Shaw. I dismissed the first few, but Larn, he's
trustworthy. If he said he saw something, he did. Eyes nearly as good
as a Tineye, that one."
Elend nodded
slowly, and ordered a patrol from his personal guard to keep watch in
the area indicated. After that, he turned his attention back to the
wood-gathering effort. He gave the orders, organizing the men into
teams, sending some to begin working, others to gather recruits.
Without fuel, many of the city's forges had shut down, and the
workers were idle. They could use something to occupy their time.
Elend saw energy in
the men's eyes as they began to split up. Elend knew that
determination, that firmness of eye and arm. It came from the
satisfaction of doing something, of not just sitting around and
waiting for fate—or kings—to act.
Elend turned back
to the map, making a few notations. From the corner of his eye, he
saw Ham saunter in. "So this is where they all went!" Ham
said. "The sparring grounds are empty."
Elend looked up,
smiling.
"You're back
to the uniform, then?" Ham asked.
Elend glanced down
at his white outfit. Designed to stand out, to set him apart from a
city stained by ash. "Yes."
"Too bad,"
Ham said with a sigh. "Nobody should have to wear a uniform."
Elend raised an
eyebrow. In the face of undeniable winter, Ham had finally taken to
wearing a shirt beneath his vest. He wore no cloak or coat, however.
Elend turned back
to the map. "The clothing suits me," he said. "It just
feels right. Anyway, that vest of yours is as much a uniform as this
is."
"No it's not."
"Oh?"
Elend asked. "Nothing screams Thug like a man who goes about in
the winter without a coat, Ham. You've used your clothing to change
how people react to you, to let them know who you are and what you
represent—which is essentially what a uniform does."
Ham paused. "That's
an interesting way of looking at it."
"What?"
Elend said. "You never argued about something like this with
Breeze?"
Ham shook his head
as he turned to look over the groups of men, listening to the men
Elend had appointed to give orders.
He's changed,
Elend thought. Running this city, dealing with all of this, it's
even changed him. The Thug was more solemn, now—more
focused. Of course, he had even more stake in the city's safety than
the rest of the crew. It was sometimes hard to remember that the
free-spirited Thug was a family man. Ham tended to not talk much
about Mardra or his two children. Elend suspected it was habit; Ham
had spent much of his marriage living apart from his family in order
to keep them safe.
This whole city
is my family, Elend thought, watching the soldiers leave to do
their work. Some might have thought something as simple as gathering
firewood to be a mundane task, of little relevance in a city
threatened by three armies. However, Elend knew that the freezing
skaa people would receive the fuel with as much appreciation as they
would salvation from the armies.
The truth was that
Elend felt a little like his soldiers did. He felt a satisfaction—a
thrill even—from doing something, anything, to help.
"What if
Cett's attack comes?" Ham said, still looking over the soldiers.
"A good portion of the army will be out scattered through the
city."
"Even if we
have a thousand men in my teams, that's not much of a dent in our
forces. Besides, Clubs thinks there will be plenty of time to gather
them. We've got messengers set up."
Elend looked back
at his map. "Anyway, I don't think Cett's going to attack just
yet. He's pretty safe in that keep, there. We'll never take him—we'd
have to pull too many men away from the city defenses, leaving
ourselves exposed. The only thing he really has to worry about is my
father . . . "
Elend trailed off.
"What?"
Ham said.
"That's why
Cett is here," Elend said, blinking in surprise. "Don't you
see? He intentionally left himself without options. If Straff
attacks, Cett's armies will end up fighting alongside our own. He's
locked in his fate with ours."
Ham frowned. "Seems
like a pretty desperate move."
Elend nodded,
thinking back to his meeting with Cett. "'Desperate,'" he
said. "That's a good word. Cett is desperate for some reason—one
I haven't been able to figure out. Anyway, by putting himself in
here, he sides with us against Straff—whether we want the
alliance or not."
"But, what if
the Assembly gives the city to Straff? If our men join with him and
attack Cett?"
"That's the
gamble he took," Elend said. Cett never intended to be able
to walk away from the confrontation here in Luthadel. He intends to
take the city or be destroyed.
He is waiting,
hoping Straff will attack, worrying that we'll just give into him.
But neither can happen as long as Straff is afraid of Vin. A
three-way standoff. With the koloss as a fourth element that nobody
can predict.
Someone needed to
do something to tip the scales. "Demoux," Elend said. "Are
you ready to take over here?"
Captain Demoux
looked over, nodding.
Elend turned to
Ham. "I have a question for you, Ham."
Ham raised an
eyebrow.
"How insane
are you feeling at the moment?
Elend led his horse
out of the tunnel into the scraggly landscape outside of Luthadel. He
turned, craning to look up at the wall. Hopefully, the soldiers there
had gotten his message, and wouldn't mistake him for a spy or a scout
of one of the enemy armies. He'd rather not end up in Tindwyl's
histories as the ex-king who'd died by an arrow from one of his own
men.
Ham led a small,
grizzled woman from the tunnel. As Elend had guessed, Ham had easily
found a suitable passwall to get them out of the city.
"Well, there
you go," said the elderly woman, resting on her cane.
"Thank you,
good woman," Elend said. "You have served your dominance
well this day."
The woman snorted,
raising an eyebrow—though, from what Elend could tell, she was
quite nearly blind. Elend smiled, pulling out a pouch and handing it
to her. She reached into it with gnarled, but surprisingly dexterous,
fingers and counted out the contents. "Three extra?"
"To pay you to
leave a scout here," Elend said. "To watch for our return."
"Return?"
the woman asked. "You aren't running?"
"No,"
Elend said. "I just have some business with one of the armies."
The woman raised
the eyebrow again. "Well, none of Granny's business," she
muttered, turning back down the hole with a tapping cane. "For
three clips, I can find a grandson to sit out here for a few hours.
Lord Ruler knows, I have enough of them."
Ham watched her go,
a spark of fondness in his eyes.
"How long have
you known about this place?" Elend asked, watching as a couple
of burly men pulled closed the hidden section of stone. Half
burrowed, half cut from the wall's stones themselves, the tunnel was
a remarkable feat. Even after hearing about the existence of such
things from Felt earlier, it was still a shock to travel through one
hidden not a few minutes' ride from Keep Venture itself.
Ham turned back to
him as the false wall snapped shut. "Oh, I've known of this for
years and years," he said. "Granny Hilde used to give me
sweets when I was a kid. Of course, that was really just a cheap way
of getting some quiet—yet well-targeted—publicity for her
passwall. When I was grown, I used to use this to sneak Mardra and
the kids in and out of the city when they came to visit."
"Wait,"
Elend said. "You grew up in Luthadel?"
"Of course."
"On the
streets, like Vin?"
Ham shook his head.
"Not really like Vin," he said in a subdued voice, scanning
the wall. "I don't really think anyone grew up like Vin. I had
skaa parents—my grandfather was the nobleman. I was involved
with the underground, but I had my parents for a good portion of my
childhood. Besides, I was a boy—and a large one." He
turned toward Elend. "I suspect that makes a big difference."
Elend nodded.
"You're not
going to shut this place down, are you?" Ham asked.
Elend turned with
shock. "Why would I?"
Ham shrugged. "It
doesn't exactly seem like the kind of honest enterprise that you
would approve of. There are probably people fleeing from the city
nightly through this hole. Granny Hilde is known to take coin and not
ask questions—even if she does grumble at you a bit."
Ham did have a
point. Probably why he didn't tell me about the place until I
specifically asked. His friends walked a fine line, close to
their old ties with the underground, yet working hard to build up the
government they'd sacrificed so much to create.
"I'm not
king," Elend said, leading his horse away from the city. "What
Granny Hilde does isn't any of my business."
Ham moved up beside
him, looking relieved. Elend could see that relief dissipate,
however, as the reality of what they were doing settled in. "I
don't like this, El."
They stopped
walking as Elend mounted. "Neither do I."
Ham took a deep
breath, then nodded.
My old nobleman
friends would have tried to talk me out of this, Elend thought
with amusement. Why did I surround myself with people who had been
loyal to the Survivor? They expect their leaders to take
irrational risks.
"I'll go with
you," Ham said.
"No,"
Elend said. "It won't make a difference. Stay here, wait to see
if I get back. If I don't, tell Vin what happened."
"Sure, I'll
tell her," Ham said wryly. "Then I'll proceed to remove her
daggers from my chest. Just make sure you come back, all right?"
Elend nodded,
barely paying attention. His eyes were focused on the army in the
distance. An army without tents, carriages, food carts, or servants.
An army who had eaten the foliage to the ground in a wide swath
around them. Koloss.
Sweat made the
reins slick in Elend's hands. This was different from before, when
he'd gone into Straff's army and Cett's keep. This time he was alone.
Vin couldn't get him out if things went bad; she was still recovering
from her wounds, and nobody knew what Elend was doing but Ham.
What do I owe
the people of this city? Elend thought. They rejected me. Why
do I still insist on trying to protect them?
"I recognize
that look, El," Ham said. "Let's go back."
Elend closed his
eyes, letting out a quiet sigh. Then he snapped his eyes open and
kicked his horse into a gallop.
It had been years
since he'd seen koloss, and that experience had come only at his
father's insistence. Straff hadn't trusted the creatures, and had
never liked having garrisons of them in the Northern Dominance, one
just a few days' march from his home city of Urteau. Those koloss had
been a reminder, a warning, from the Lord Ruler.
Elend rode his
horse hard, as if using its momentum to bolster his own will. Aside
from one brief visit to the Urteau koloss garrison, everything he
knew of the creatures came from books—but Tindwyl's instruction
had weakened his once absolute, and slightly naive, trust in his
learning.
It will have to
be enough, Elend thought as he approached the camp. He gritted
his teeth, slowing his animal as he approached a wandering squad of
Koloss.
It was as he
remembered. One large creature—its skin revoltingly split and
cracked by stretch marks—led a few medium-sized beasts, whose
bleeding rips were only beginning to appear at the corners of their
mouths and the edges of their eyes. A smattering of smaller
creatures—their baggy skin loose and sagging beneath their eyes
and arms—accompanied their betters.
Elend reined in his
horse, trotting it over to the largest beast. "Take me to
Jastes."
"Get off your
horse," the koloss said.
Elend looked the
creature directly in the eyes. Atop his horse, he was nearly the same
height. "Take me to Jastes."
The koloss regarded
him with a set of beady, unreadable eyes. It bore a rip from one eye
to the other, above the nose, a secondary rip curving down to one of
the nostrils. The nose itself was pulled so tight it was twisted and
flattened, held to the bone a few inches off-center.
This was the
moment. The books said the creature would either do as commanded or
simply attack him. Elend sat tensely.
"Come,"
the koloss snapped, turning to walk back toward the camp. The rest of
the creatures surrounded Elend's horse, and the beast shuffled
nervously. Elend kept a tight hold on his reins and nudged the animal
forward. It responded skittishly.
He should have felt
good at his small victory, but his tension only increased. They moved
forward into the koloss camp. It was like being swallowed. Like
letting a rockslide collapse around you. Koloss looked up as he
passed, watching him with their red, emotionless eyes. Many others
just stood silently around their cooking fires, unresponsive, like
men who had been born dull-minded and witless.
Others fought. They
killed each other, wrestling on the ground before their uncaring
companions. No philosopher, scientist, or scholar had been able to
determine exactly what set off a koloss. Greed seemed a good
motivation. Yet, they would sometimes attack when there was plenty of
food, killing a companion for his hunk of beef. Pain was
another good motivator, apparently, as was a challenge to authority.
Carnal, visceral reasons. And yet, there seemed to be times when they
attacked without any cause or reason.
And after fighting,
they would explain themselves in calm tones, as if their actions were
perfectly rational. Elend shivered as he heard yells, telling himself
that he would probably be all right until he reached Jastes. Koloss
usually just attacked each other.
Unless they got
into a blood frenzy.
He pushed that
thought away, instead focusing on the things that Sazed had mentioned
about his trip into the koloss camp. The creatures wore the wide,
brutish iron swords that Sazed had described. The bigger the koloss,
the bigger the weapon. When a koloss reached a size where he thought
he needed a larger sword, he had only two choices: find one that had
been discarded, or kill someone and take theirs. A koloss population
could often be crudely controlled by increasing or decreasing the
number of swords available to the group.
None of the
scholars knew how the creatures bred.
As Sazed had
explained, these koloss also had strange little pouches tied to their
sword straps. What are they? Elend thought. Sazed said he
saw the largest koloss carrying three or four. But that one leading
my group has almost twenty. Even the small koloss in Elend's
group had three pouches.
That's the
difference, he thought. Whatever is in those pouches, could it
be the way Jastes controls the creatures?
There was no way to
know, save begging one of the pouches off a koloss—and he
doubted they would let them go.
As he walked, he
noticed another oddity: some of the koloss were wearing clothing.
Before, he'd seen them only in loincloths, as Sazed had reported.
Yet, many of these koloss had pants, shirts, or skirts pulled onto
their bodies. They wore the clothing without regard for size, and
most pieces were so tight they had torn. Others were so loose they
had to be tied on. Elend saw a few of the larger koloss wearing
garments like bandanas tied around their arms or heads.
"We are not
koloss," the lead koloss suddenly said, turning to Elend as they
walked.
Elend frowned.
"Explain."
"You think we
are koloss," it said through lips that were stretched too
tightly to work properly. "We are humans. We will live in your
city. We will kill you, and we will take it."
Elend shivered,
realizing the source of the mismatched garments. They had come from
the village that the koloss had attacked, the one whose refugees had
trickled into Luthadel. This appeared to be a new development in
koloss thinking. Or, had it always been there, repressed by the Lord
Ruler? The scholar in Elend was fascinated. The rest of him was
simply horrified.
His koloss guide
paused before a small group of tents, the only such structures in the
camp. Then the lead koloss turned and yelled, startling Elend's
horse. Elend fought to keep his mount from throwing him as the koloss
jumped and attacked one of its companions, proceeding to pummel it
with a massive fist.
Elend won his
struggle. The lead koloss, however, did not.
Elend climbed off
his horse, patting the beast on the neck as the victimized koloss
pulled his sword from the chest of his former leader. The
survivor—who now bore several cuts in his skin that hadn't come
from stretching—bent down to harvest the pouches tied to the
corpse's back. Elend watched with a muted fascination as the koloss
stood and spoke.
"He was never
a good leader," it said in a slurred voice.
I can't let
these monsters attack my city, Elend thought. I have to do
something. He pulled his horse forward, turning his back on the
koloss as he entered the secluded section of camp, watched over by a
group of nervous young men in uniforms. Elend handed his reins to one
of them.
"Take care of
this for me," Elend said, striding forward.
"Wait!"
one of the soldiers said. "Halt!"
Elend turned
sharply, facing the shorter man, who was trying to both level his
spear at Elend and keep an eye on the koloss. Elend didn't try to be
harsh; he just wanted to keep his own anxiety under control and keep
moving. Either way, the resulting glare probably would have impressed
even Tindwyl.
The soldier jerked
to a halt.
"I am Elend
Venture," Elend said. "You know that name?"
The man nodded.
"You may
announce me to Lord Lekal," Elend said. "Just get to the
tent before I do."
The young man took
off at a dash. Elend followed, striding up to the tent, where other
soldiers stood hesitantly.
What must it
have done to them, Elend wondered, living surrounded by
koloss, so terribly outnumbered? Feeling a stab of pity, he
didn't try to bully his way in. He stood with faux patience until a
voice called from inside. "Let him in."
Elend brushed past
the guards and threw open the tent flap.
The months had not
been kind to Jastes Lekal. Somehow, the few wisps of hair on his head
looked far more pathetic than complete baldness would have. His suit
was sloppy and stained, his eyes underlined by a pair of deep bags.
He was pacing, and jumped slightly when Elend entered.
Then he froze for a
moment, eyes wide. Finally, he raised a quivering hand to push back
hair he didn't have. "Elend?" he asked. "What in the
Lord Ruler's name happened to you?"
"Responsibility,
Jastes," Elend said quietly. "It appears that neither of us
were ready for it."
"Out,"
Jastes said, waving to his guards. They shuffled past Elend, closing
the tent flap behind them.
"It's been a
while, Elend," Jastes said, chuckling weakly.
Elend nodded.
"I remember
those days," Jastes said, "sitting in your den or mine,
sharing a drink with Telden. We were so innocent, weren't we?"
"Innocent,"
Elend said, "but hopeful."
"Want
something to drink?" Jastes said, turning toward the room's
desk. Elend eyed the bottles and flasks lying in the corner of the
room. They were all empty. Jastes removed a full bottle from the desk
and poured Elend a small cup, the size and clear color an indication
that this was no simple dinner wine.
Elend accepted the
small cup, but did not drink. "What happened, Jastes? How did
the clever, thoughtful philosopher I knew turn into a tyrant?"
"Tyrant?"
Jastes snapped, downing his cup in a single shot. "I'm no
tyrant. Your father's the tyrant. I'm just a realist."
"Sitting at
the center of a koloss army doesn't seem to be a very realistic
position to me."
"I can control
them."
"And Suisna?"
Elend asked. "The village they slaughtered?"
Jastes wavered.
"That was an unfortunate accident."
Elend looked down
at the drink in his hand, then threw it aside, the liquor splashing
on the dusty tent floor. "This isn't my father's den, and we are
not friends any longer. I will call no man friend who leads something
like this against my city. What happened to your honor, Jastes
Lekal?"
Jastes snorted,
glancing at the spilled liquor. "That's always been the problem
with you, Elend. So certain, so optimistic, so self-righteous."
"It was our
optimism," Elend said, stepping forward. "We wanted to
change things, Jastes, not destroy them!"
"Is that so?"
Jastes countered, showing a temper Elend had never seen in his
friend. "You want to know why I'm here, Elend? Did you even pay
attention to what was happening in the Southern Dominance while
you played in Luthadel?"
"I'm sorry
about what happened to your family, Jastes."
"Sorry?"
Jastes said, snatching the bottle off his desk. "You're sorry?
I implemented your plans, Elend. I did everything we talked
about—freedom, political honesty. I trusted my allies rather
than crushing them into submission. And you know what happened?"
Elend closed his
eyes.
"They killed
everyone, Elend," Jastes said. "That's what you do when you
take over. You kill your rivals and their families—even the
young girls, even the babies. And you leave their bodies, as a
warning. That's good politics. That's how you stay in power!"
"It's easy to
believe in something when you win all the time, Jastes," Elend
said, opening his eyes. "The losses are what define a man's
faith."
"Losses?"
Jastes demanded. "My sister was a loss?"
"No, I mean—"
"Enough!"
Jastes snapped, slamming the bottle down on his desk. "Guards!"
Two men threw back
the tent flap and moved into the room.
"Take His
Majesty captive," Jastes said, with an unsteady wave of his
hand. "Send a messenger to the city, tell them that we want to
negotiate."
"I'm not king
anymore, Jastes," Elend said.
Jastes stopped.
"Do you think
I'd come here and let myself get captured if I were king?" Elend
asked. "They deposed me. The Assembly invoked a no-confidence
clause and chose a new king."
"You bloody
idiot," Jastes said.
"Losses,
Jastes," Elend said. "It hasn't been as hard for me as it
was for you, but I do think I understand."
"So,"
Jastes said, running a hand through his hair, "that fancy suit
and haircut didn't save you, eh?"
"Take your
koloss and go, Jastes."
"That sounded
like a threat, Elend," Jastes said. "You aren't king, you
don't have an army, and I don't see your Mistborn around. What
grounds do you have for threats?"
"They're
koloss," Elend said. "Do you really want them
getting into the city? It's your home, Jastes—or, it was once.
There are thousands of people inside!"
"I can . . .
control my army," Jastes said.
"No, I doubt
you can," Elend said. "What happened, Jastes? Did they
decide they needed a king? They decided that's the way that 'humans'
did it, so they should do it, too? What is it that they carry in
those pouches?"
Jastes didn't
answer.
Elend sighed. "What
happens when one of them just snaps and attacks you?"
Jastes shook his
head. "I'm sorry, Elend," he said quietly. "I can't
let Straff get that atium."
"And my
people?"
Jastes paused only
briefly, then lowered his eyes and motioned to the guards. One laid a
hand on Elend's shoulder.
Elend's reaction
surprised even himself. He slammed his elbow up into the man's face,
shattering his nose, then took the other man down with a kick to the
leg. Before Jastes could do more than cry out, Elend jumped forward.
Elend ripped an
obsidian knife—given to him by Vin—from his boot and
caught Jastes by the shoulder. Elend slammed the whimpering man
around, pushing him backward onto the desk and—barely thinking
to consider his actions—rammed the knife into his old friend's
shoulder.
Jastes emitted a
loud, pathetic scream.
"If killing
you would do anything useful, Jastes," Elend growled, "I'd
do it right now. But I don't know how you control these things, and I
don't want to set them loose."
Soldiers piled into
the room. Elend didn't look up. He slapped Jastes, stopping his cries
of pain.
"You listen,"
Elend said. "I don't care if you've been hurt, I don't care if
you don't believe in the philosophies anymore, and I don't really
care if you get yourself killed playing politics with Straff and
Cett.
"But I do
care if you threaten my people. I want you to march your army out of
my dominance—go attack Straff's homeland, or maybe Cett's.
They're both undefended. I promise I won't let your enemies get the
atium.
"And, as a
friend, I'll give you a bit of counsel. Think about that wound in
your arm for a little while, Jastes. I was your best friend, and I
nearly killed you. What the hell are you doing sitting in the
middle of an entire army of deranged koloss?"
Soldiers surrounded
him. Elend stood, ripping the knife from Jastes's body and spinning
the man around, pressing the weapon against his throat.
The guards froze.
"I'm leaving,"
Elend said, pushing the confused Jastes ahead of him, moving out of
the tent. He noticed with some concern that there were barely a dozen
human guards. Sazed had counted more. Where had Jastes lost them?
There was no sign
of Elend's horse. So he kept a wary eye on the soldiers, pulling
Jastes toward the invisible line between the human camp and the
koloss one. Elend turned as he reached the perimeter, then pushed
Jastes back toward his men. They caught him, one pulling out a
bandage for the arm. Others made moves as if to chase Elend, but they
paused, hesitant.
Elend had crossed
the line into the koloss camp. He stood quietly, watching the
pathetic group of young soldiers, Jastes at their center. Even as
they ministered to him, Elend could see the look in Jastes's eyes.
Hatred. He wouldn't retreat. The man Elend had known was dead,
replaced by this product of a new world that didn't kindly regard
philosophers and idealists.
Elend turned away,
walking among the koloss. A group of them quickly approached. The
same one as before? He couldn't tell for certain.
"Take me out,"
Elend commanded, meeting the eyes of the largest koloss in the team.
Either Elend seemed more commanding now, or this koloss was more
easily cowed, for there was no argument. The creature simply nodded
and began to shuffle out of the camp, his team surrounding Elend.
This trip was a
waste, Elend thought with frustration. All I did was
antagonize Jastes. I risked my life for nothing.
If only I could
find out what was in those pouches!
He eyed the group
of koloss around him. It was a typical group, ranging in size from
five feet to one ten-foot monstrosity. They walked along with
slumped, unengaged postures . . . .
Elend still had his
knife out.
This is stupid,
he thought. For some reason, that didn't stop him from choosing the
smallest koloss in the group, taking a deep breath, and attacking.
The rest of the
koloss paused to watch. The creature Elend had chosen spun—but
in the wrong direction. It turned to face its companion koloss, the
one nearest to it in size, as Elend tackled it, ramming the knife
into its back.
Even at five feet
with a small build, the koloss was incredibly strong. It tossed Elend
off, bellowing in pain. Elend, however, managed to keep hold of his
dagger.
Can't let it get
out that sword, he thought, scrambling to his feet and ramming
his knife into the creature's thigh. The koloss dropped again,
punching at Elend with one arm, fingers reaching for its sword with
the other. Elend took the punch to the chest, and fell back to the
sooty ground.
He groaned,
gasping. The koloss pulled out its sword, but had trouble standing.
Both knife wounds bled stark red blood; the liquid seemed brighter,
more reflective, than that of a human, but that might have just been
a contrast with the deep blue skin.
The koloss finally
managed to gain its feet, and Elend realized his mistake. He'd let
the adrenaline of his confrontation with Jastes—his frustration
at his inability to stop the armies—drive him. He'd sparred a
lot lately, but he was in no position to take a koloss.
But it was far too
late to worry about that now.
Elend rolled out of
the way as a thick, clublike sword smashed to the ground beside him.
Instincts overrode terror, and he mostly managed to avoid the
backswing. It took him a bit in the side, spraying a patch of blood
across his once white uniform, but he barely even felt the cut.
Only one way to
win a knife fight against a guy with a sword . . . Elend thought,
gripping his knife. The thought, oddly, hadn't come from one of his
trainers, or even from Vin. He wasn't sure where it came from, but he
trusted it.
Close in tight
as fast as possible, and kill quickly.
And Elend attacked.
The koloss swung as well. Elend could see the attack, but couldn't do
anything about it. He could only throw himself forward, knife raised,
teeth clenched.
He rammed his knife
into the koloss's eye, barely managing to get inside the creature's
reach. Even so, the hilt of the sword hit him in the stomach.
Both dropped.
Elend groaned
quietly, slowly becoming aware of the hard, ash-packed earth and
weeds eaten down to their roots. A fallen twig was scratching his
cheek. Odd that he would notice that, considering the pain in his
chest. He stumbled to his feet. The koloss he'd attacked did not
rise. Its companions stood, looking unconcerned, though their eyes
were focused on him. They seemed to want something.
"He ate my
horse," Elend said, saying the first thing that came to his
clouded mind.
The group of koloss
nodded. Elend stumbled forward, wiping the ash from his cheek with a
dazed hand as he knelt beside the dead creature. He ripped his knife
out, then slid it back in his boot. Next he unfastened the pouches;
this koloss had two.
Finally, not
certain why, he grabbed the creature's large sword and rested it up
on his shoulder. It was so weighty that he could barely carry it, and
certainly wouldn't be able to swing it. How does a creature so
small use something like this?
The koloss watched
him work without comment; then they led him out of the camp. Once
they had retreated, Elend pulled open one of the pouches and looked
inside.
He shouldn't have
been surprised by what he found inside. Jastes had decided to control
his army the old-fashioned way.
He was paying them.
The others call
me mad. As I have said, that may be true.





43
MIST POURED INTO
THE DARK room, collapsing around Vin like a waterfall as she stood in
the open balcony doorway. Elend was a motionless lump sleeping in his
bed a short distance away.
Apparently,
Mistress, OreSeur had explained, he went into the koloss camp
alone. You were asleep, and none of us knew what he was doing. I
don't think he managed to persuade the creatures not to attack, but
he did come back with some very useful information.
OreSeur sat on his
haunches beside her. He had not asked why Vin had come to Elend's
rooms, nor why she stood, quietly watching the former king in the
night.
She couldn't
protect him. She tried so hard, but the impossibility of keeping even
one person safe suddenly seemed so real—so tangible—to
her that she felt sick.
Elend had been
right to go out. He was his own man, competent, kingly. What he had
done would only put him in more danger, however. Fear had been a
companion of hers for such a long time that she had grown accustomed
to it, and it rarely caused a physical reaction in her. Yet, watching
him sleep quietly, she found her hands traitorously unsteady.
I saved him from
the assassins. I protected him. I'm a powerful Allomancer. Why, then,
do I feel so helpless?
So alone.
She walked forward,
bare feet silent as she stepped up to Elend's bed. He did not wake.
She stood for a long moment, just looking at him peaceful in his
slumber.
OreSeur growled
quietly.
Vin spun. A figure
stood on the balcony, straight-backed and black, a near silhouette
even to her tin-enhanced eyes. Mist fell before him, pooling on the
floor, spreading out like an ethereal moss.
"Zane,"
she whispered.
"He is not
safe, Vin," he said, stepping slowly into the room, pushing a
wave of mist before him.
She looked back at
Elend. "He never will be."
"I came to
tell you that there is a traitor in your midst."
Vin looked up.
"Who?" she asked.
"The man,
Demoux," Zane said. "He contacted my father a short time
before the assassination attempt, offering to open the gates and give
up the city."
Vin frowned. That
makes no sense.
Zane stepped
forward. "Cett's work, Vin. He is a snake, even among high
lords. I don't know how he bribed away one of your own men, but I do
know that Demoux tried to provoke my father to attack the city during
the voting."
Vin paused. If
Straff had attacked at that moment, it would have reinforced the
impression that he had sent the assassins in the first place.
"Elend and
Penrod were supposed to die," Zane said. "With the Assembly
in chaos, Cett could have taken charge. He could have led his
forces—along with your own—against Straff's attacking
army. He would have become the savior who protected Luthadel against
the tyranny of an invader . . . ."
Vin stood quietly.
Just because Zane said it didn't mean it was true. Yet, her
investigations whispered that Demoux was the traitor.
She'd recognized
the assassin at the assembly, and he had been from Cett's
retinue, so she knew that Zane was telling the truth about at least
one thing. Plus, Cett had precedent for sending Allomancer assassins:
he had sent the ones months ago, when Vin had used the last of her
atium. Zane had saved her life during that fight.
She clenched her
fists, frustration biting at her chest. If he's right, then Demoux
is dead, and an enemy kandra has been in the palace, spending his
days just steps away from Elend. Even if Zane lies, we still have a
tyrant inside the city, another without. A force of koloss salivating
over the people. And Elend doesn't need me.
Because there's
nothing I can do.
"I see your
frustration," Zane whispered, stepping up beside Elend's bed,
looking down at his sleeping brother. "You keep listening to
him. You want to protect him, but he won't let you." Zane looked
up, meeting her eyes. She saw an implication in them.
There was
something she could do—the thing a part of her had wanted to do
from the beginning. The thing she'd been trained to do.
"Cett almost
killed the man you love," Zane said. "Your Elend does as he
wishes. Well, let us do as you wish." He looked into her
eyes. "We have been someone else's knives for too long. Let's
show Cett why he should fear us."
Her fury, her
frustration at the siege, yearned to do as Zane suggested. Yet, she
wavered, her thoughts in chaos. She had killed—killed well—just
a short time before, and it had terrified her. Yet . . . Elend could
take risks—insane risks, traveling into an army of koloss on
his own. It almost felt like a betrayal. She had worked so hard to
protect him, straining herself, exposing herself. Then, just a few
days later, he wandered alone into a camp full of monsters.
She gritted her
teeth. Part of her whispered that if Elend wouldn't be reasonable and
stay out of danger, she'd just have to go and make sure the
threats against him were removed.
"Let's go,"
she whispered.
Zane nodded.
"Realize this," he said. "We can't just assassinate
him. Another warlord will take his place, and take his armies. We
have to attack hard. We have to hit that army so soundly that
whoever takes over for Cett is so frightened that he withdraws."
Vin paused, looking
away from him, nails biting into her own palms.
"Tell me,"
he said, stepping closer to her. "What would your Kelsier tell
you to do?"
The answer was
simple. Kelsier would never have gotten into this situation. He had
been a hard man, a man with little tolerance for any who threatened
those he loved. Cett and Straff wouldn't have lasted a single night
at Luthadel without feeling Kelsier's knife.
There was a part of
her that had always been awed by his powerful, utilitarian brutality.
There are two
ways to stay safe, Reen's voice whispered to her. Either be so
quiet and harmless that people ignore you, or be so dangerous that
they're terrified of you.
She met Zane's eyes
and nodded. He smiled, then moved over and jumped out the window.
"OreSeur,"
she whispered once he was gone. "My atium."
The dog paused,
then padded up to her, his shoulder splitting. "Mistress . . . "
he said slowly. "Do not do this."
She glanced at
Elend. She couldn't protect him from everything. But she could do
something.
She took the atium
from OreSeur. Her hands no longer shook. She felt cold.
"Cett has
threatened all that I love," she whispered. "He will soon
know that there is something in this world more deadly than his
assassins. Something more powerful than his army. Something more
terrifying than the Lord Ruler himself.
"And I am
coming for him."
Mist duty, they
called it.
Every soldier had
to take his turn, standing in the dark with a sputtering torch.
Someone had to watch. Had to stare into those shifting, deceitful
mists and wonder if anything was out there. Watching.
Wellen knew there
was.
He knew it, but he
never spoke. Soldiers laughed at such superstitions. They had to go
out in the mists. They were used to it. They knew better than to fear
it.
Supposedly.
"Hey,"
Jarloux said, stepping up to the edge of the wall. "Wells, do
you see something out there?"
Of course he
didn't. They stood with several dozen others on the perimeter of Keep
Hasting, watching from the outer keep wall—a low fortification,
perhaps fifteen feet tall, that surrounded the grounds. Their job was
to look for anything suspicious in the mists.
"Suspicious."
That was the word they used. It was all suspicious. It was
mist. That shifting darkness, that void made of chaos and hatred.
Wellen had never trusted it. They were out there. He knew.
Something moved in
the darkness. Wellen stepped back, staring into the void, his heart
beginning to flutter, hands beginning to sweat as he raised his
spear.
"Yeah,"
Jarloux said, squinting. "I swear, I see . . . "
It came, as Wellen
had always known it would. Like a thousand gnats on a hot day, like a
hail of arrows shot by an entire army. Coins sprayed across the
battlements. A wall of shimmering death, hundreds of trails zipping
through the mists. Metal rang against stone, and men cried out in
pain.
Wellen stepped
back, raising his spear, as Jarloux yelled the alarm. Jarloux died
halfway through the call, a coin snapping through his mouth, throwing
out a chip of tooth as it proceeded out the back of his head. Jarloux
collapsed, and Wellen stumbled away from the corpse, knowing that it
was too late to run.
The coins stopped.
Silence in the air. Men lay dying or groaning at his feet.
Then they came. Two
dark shadows of death in the night. Ravens in the mist. They flew
over Wellen with a rustle of black cloth.
And they left him
behind, alone amid the corpses of what had once been a squad of forty
men.
Vin landed in a
crouch, bare feet on the cool stone cobbles of the Hasting courtyard.
Zane landed upright, standing—as always—with his towering
air of self-confidence.
Pewter blazed
within her, giving her muscles the taut energy of a thousand excited
moments. She easily ignored the pain of her wounded side. Her sole
bead of atium rested in her stomach, but she didn't use it. Not yet.
Not unless she was right, and Cett proved to be Mistborn.
"We'll go from
the bottom up," Zane said.
Vin nodded. The
central tower of Keep Hasting was many stories high, and they
couldn't know which one Cett was on. If they started low, he wouldn't
be able to escape.
Besides. Going up
would be more difficult. The energy in Vin's limbs cried for release.
She'd waited, remained coiled, for far too long. She was tired of
weakness, tired of being restrained. She had spent months as a knife,
held immobile at someone's throat.
It was time to cut.
The two dashed
forward. Torches began to light around them as Cett's men—those
who camped in the courtyard—awakened to the alarm. Tents
unfurled and collapsed, men yelling in surprise, looking for the army
that assailed them. They could only wish that they were so lucky.
Vin jumped straight
up into the air, and Zane spun, throwing a bag of coins around him.
Hundreds of bits of copper sparkled in the air beneath her—a
peasant's fortune. Vin landed with a rustle, and they both Pushed,
their power throwing the coins outward. The torch-sparkled missiles
ripped through the camp, dropping surprised, drowsy men.
Vin and Zane
continued toward the central tower. A squad of soldiers had formed up
at the tower's front. They still seemed disoriented, confused, and
sleepy, but they were armed. Armed with metal armor and steel
weapons—a choice that, had they actually been facing an enemy
army, would have been wise.
Zane and Vin slid
into the midst of the soldiers. Zane tossed a single coin into the
air between them. Vin reached out and Pushed against it, feeling
Zane's weight as he also Pushed against it.
Braced against each
other, they both Pushed in opposite directions, throwing their weight
against the breastplates of the soldiers to either side. With flared
pewter—holding each other steady—their Pushes scattered
the soldiers as if they had been slapped by enormous hands. Spears
and swords twisted in the night, clattering to the cobbles.
Breastplates towed bodies away.
Vin extinguished
her steel as she felt Zane's weight come off the coin. The sparkling
bit of metal bounced to the ground between them, and Zane turned,
throwing up his hand toward the single soldier who remained standing
directly between Zane and the keep doors.
A squad of soldiers
raced up behind Zane, but they suddenly halted as he Pushed against
them—then sent the transfer of weight directly into the lone
soldier. The unfortunate man crashed backward into the keep doors.
Bones crunched. The
doors flung open as the soldier burst into the room beyond. Zane
ducked through the open doorway, and Vin moved smoothly behind him,
her bare feet leaving rough cobbles and falling on smooth marble
instead.
Soldiers waited
inside. These didn't wear armor, and they carried large wooden
shields to block coins. They were armed with staves or obsidian
swords. Hazekillers—men trained specifically to fight
Allomancers. There were, perhaps, fifty of them.
Now it begins in
earnest, Vin thought, leaping into the air and Pushing off the
door's hinges.
Zane led by Pushing
on the same man he'd used to break open the doors, throwing the
corpse toward a group of hazekillers. As the soldier crashed into
them, Vin landed amid a second group. She spun on the floor, whipping
out her legs and flaring pewter, tripping a good four men. As the
others tried to strike, she Pushed downward against a coin in her
pouch, ripping it free and throwing herself upward. She spun in the
air, catching a falling staff discarded by a tripped soldier.
Obsidian cracked
against the white marble where she had been. Vin came down with her
own weapon and struck, attacking faster than anyone should be able
to, hitting ears, chins, and throats. Skulls cracked. Bones broke.
She was barely breathing hard when she found all ten of her opponents
down.
Ten men . . .
didn't Kelsier once tell me he had trouble with half a dozen
hazekillers?
No time to think. A
large group of soldiers charged her. She yelled and jumped toward
them, throwing her staff into the face of the first man she met. The
others raised their shields, surprised, but Vin whipped out a pair of
obsidian daggers as she landed. She rammed them into the thighs of
two men before her, then spun past them, attacking flesh where she
saw it.
An attack flickered
from the corner of her eye, and she snapped up an arm, blocking the
wooden staff as it came for her head. The wood cracked, and she took
the man down with a wide sweep of the dagger, nearly beheading him.
She jumped backward as the others moved in, braced herself, then
yanked on the armored corpse Zane had used before, Pulling it toward
her.
Shields did little
good against a missile so large. Vin smashed the corpse into her
opponents, sweeping them before her. To the side, she could see the
remnants of the hazekillers who had attacked Zane. Zane stood among
them, a black pillar before the fallen, arms outstretched. He met her
eyes, then nodded toward the rear of the chamber.
Vin ignored the few
remaining hazekillers. She Pushed against the corpse and sent herself
sliding across the floor. Zane jumped up, Pushing back, shattering
his way through a window and into the mists. Vin quickly did a check
of the back rooms: no Cett. She turned and took down a straggling
hazekiller as she ducked into the lift shaft.
She needed no
elevator. She shot straight up on a Pushed coin, bursting out onto
the third floor. Zane would take the second.
Vin landed quietly
on the marble floor, hearing footsteps come down a stairwell beside
her. She recognized this large, open room: it was the chamber where
she and Elend had met Cett for dinner. It was now empty, even the
table removed, but she recognized the circular perimeter of
stained-glass windows.
Hazekillers burst
from the kitchen room. Dozens. There must be another stairwell
back there, Vin thought as she darted toward the stairwell beside
her. Dozens more were coming out there, however, and the two groups
moved to surround her.
Fifty-to-one must
have seemed like good odds for the men, and they charged confidently.
She glanced at the open kitchen doors, and saw no Cett beyond. This
floor was clear.
Cett certainly
brought a lot of hazekillers, she thought, backing quietly to the
center of the room. Save for the stairwell, kitchens, and pillars,
the room was mostly surrounded in arched stained-glass windows.
He planned for
my attack. Or, he tried to.
Vin ducked down as
the waves of men surrounded her. She turned her head up, eyes closed,
and burned duralumin.
Then she Pulled.
Stained-glass
windows—set in metal frames inside their arches—exploded
around the room. She felt the metal frames burst inward, twisting on
themselves before her awesome power. She imagined twinkling slivers
of multicolored glass in the air. She heard men scream as glass and
metal hit them, embedding in their flesh.
Only the outer
layer of men would die from the blast. Vin opened her eyes and jumped
as a dozen dueling canes fell around her. She passed through a hail
of attacks. Some hit. It didn't matter. She couldn't feel pain at the
moment.
She Pushed against
a broken metal frame, throwing herself over the heads of soldiers,
landing outside the large circle of attackers. The outer line of men
was down, impaled by glass shards and twisted metal frames. Vin
raised a hand and bowed her head.
Duralumin and
steel. She Pushed. The world lurched.
Vin shot out into
the mists through a broken window as she Pushed against the line of
corpses impaled by metal frames. The bodies were thrown away from
her, smashing into the men who were still alive in the center.
Dead, dying, and
unharmed were swept from the room, Pushed out the window opposite
Vin. Bodies twisted in the mists, fifty men thrown into the night,
leaving the room empty save for trails of blood and discarded bits of
glass.
Vin downed a vial
of metals as the mists rushed around her; then she Pulled herself
back toward the keep, using a window on the fourth floor. As she
approached, a corpse crashed through the window, falling out into the
night. She caught a glimpse of Zane disappearing out another window
on the opposite side. This level was clear.
Lights burned on
the fifth floor. They probably could have come here first, but that
wasn't the plan. Zane was right. They didn't just need to kill Cett.
They needed to terrify his entire army.
Vin Pushed against
the same corpse that Zane had thrown out the window, using its metal
armor as an anchor. It shot down at an angle, passing just inside a
broken window, and Vin soared upward in an angle away from the
building. A quick Pull directed her back to the building once she
reached the elevation she needed. She landed at a window on the fifth
floor.
Vin grasped the
stone sill, heart thumping, breaths coming in deep gasps. Sweat made
her face cold in the winter breeze, despite the heat burning within
her. She gulped, eyes wide, and flared her pewter.
Mistborn.
She shattered the
window with a slap. The soldiers that waited beyond jumped backward,
spinning. One wore a metal belt buckle. He died first. The other
twenty barely knew how to react as the buckle buzzed through their
ranks, twisting between Vin's Pushes and Pulls. They had been
trained, instructed, and perhaps even tested against Allomancers.
But they had never
fought Vin.
Men screamed and
fell, Vin ripping through their ranks with only the buckle as a
weapon. Before the force of her pewter, tin, steel, and iron, the
possible use of atium seemed an incredible waste. Even without it,
she was a terrible weapon—one that, until this moment, even she
hadn't understood.
Mistborn.
The last man fell.
Vin stood among them, feeling a numbing sense of satisfaction. She
let the belt buckle slip from her fingers. It hit carpet. She stood
in a room that wasn't unadorned as the rest of the building had been;
there was furniture here, and there were some minor decorations.
Perhaps Elend's clearing crews hadn't gotten this far before Cett's
arrival, or perhaps he'd simply brought some of his own comforts.
Behind her was the
stairwell. In front of her was a fine wooden wall set with a door—the
inner apartments. Vin stepped forward quietly, mistcloak rustling as
she Pulled four lamps off the brackets behind her. They whipped
forward, and she sidestepped, letting them crash into the wall. Fire
blossomed across splattered oil, billowing across the wall, the force
of the lamps breaking the door on its hinges. She raised a hand,
Pushing it fully open.
Fire dripped around
her as she stepped into the room beyond. The richly decorated chamber
was quiet, and eerily empty save for two figures. Cett sat in a
simple wooden chair, bearded, sloppily dressed, and looking very,
very tired. Cett's young son stepped in between Cett and Vin. The boy
held a dueling cane.
So, which one is
Mistborn?
The boy swung. Vin
caught the weapon, then shoved the boy to the side. He crashed into
the wooden wall, then slumped to the ground. Vin eyed him.
"Leave
Gneorndin alone, woman," Cett said. "Do what you came to
do."
Vin turned toward
the nobleman. She remembered her frustration, her rage, her cool, icy
anger. She stepped forward and grabbed Cett by the front of his suit.
"Fight me," she said, and tossed him backward.
He slammed against
the back wall, then slumped to the ground. Vin prepared her atium,
but he did not rise. He simply rolled to the side, coughing.
Vin walked over,
pulling him up by one arm. He balled a fist, trying to strike her,
but he was pathetically weak. She let the blows bounce off her side.
"Fight me,"
she commanded, tossing him to the side. He tumbled across the
floor—head hitting hard—and came to rest against the
burning wall, a trickle of blood running from his brow. He didn't
rise.
Vin gritted her
teeth, striding forward.
"Leave him
alone!" The boy, Gneorndin, stumbled in front of Cett, raising
his dueling cane in a wavering hand.
Vin paused, cocking
her head. The boy's brow was streaked with sweat, and he was unsteady
on his feet. She looked into his eyes, and saw absolute terror
therein. This boy was no Mistborn. Yet, he held his ground.
Pathetically, hopelessly, he stood before the body of the fallen
Cett.
"Step aside,
son," Cett said in a tired voice. "There is nothing you can
do here."
The boy started to
shake, then began to weep.
Tears, Vin
thought, feeling an oddly surreal feeling cloud her mind. She reached
up, surprised to find wet streaks on her own cheeks.
"You have no
Mistborn," she whispered.
Cett had struggled
to a half-reclining position, and he looked into her eyes.
"No
Allomancers faced us this night," she said. "You used them
all on the assassination attempt in the Assembly Hall?"
"The only
Allomancers I had, I sent against you months ago," Cett said
with a sigh. "They were all I ever had, my only hope of killing
you. Even they weren't from my family. My whole line has been
corrupted by skaa blood—Allrianne is the only Allomancer to be
born to us for centuries."
"You came to
Luthadel . . . "
"Because
Straff would have come for me eventually," Cett said. "My
best chance, lass, was to kill you early on. That's why I sent
them all against you. Failing that, I knew I had to try and take this
damn city and its atium so I could buy myself some Allomancers.
Didn't work."
"You could
have just offered us an alliance."
Cett chuckled,
pulling himself up to a sitting position. "It doesn't work that
way in real politics. You take, or you get taken. Besides, I've
always been a gambling man." He looked up at her, meeting her
eyes. "Do what you came to," he repeated.
Vin shivered. She
couldn't feel her tears. She could barely feel anything.
Why? Why can't I
make sense of anything anymore?
The room began to
shake. Vin spun, looking toward the back wall. The wood there
quivered and spasmed like a dying animal. Nails began to pop, ripping
backward through the paneling; then the entire wall burst away from
Vin. Burning boards, splinters, nails, and shingles sprayed in the
air, flying around a man in black. Zane stood sideways in the room
beyond, death strewn at his feet, hands at his sides.
Red streamed from
the tips of his fingers, running in a steady drip. He looked up
through the burning remnants of the wall, smiling. Then he stepped
toward Cett's room.
"No!" Vin
said, dashing at him.
Zane paused,
surprised. He stepped to the side, easily dodging Vin, walking toward
Cett and the boy.
"Zane, leave
them!" Vin said, turning toward him, Pushing herself in a skid
across the room. She reached for his arm. The black fabric glistened
wet with blood that was only his own.
Zane dodged. He
turned toward her, curious. She reached for him, but he moved out of
the way with supernatural ease, outstepping her like a master
swordsman facing a young boy.
Atium, Vin
thought. He probably burned it this entire time. But, he didn't
need it to fight those men . . . they didn't have a chanee against us
anyway.
"Please,"
she asked. "Leave them."
Zane turned toward
Cett, who sat expectant. The boy was at his side, trying to pull his
father away.
Zane looked back at
her, head cocked.
"Please,"
Vin repeated.
Zane frowned. "He
still controls you, then," he said, sounding disappointed. "I
thought, maybe, if you could fight and see just how powerful you
were, you'd shake yourself free of Elend's grip. I guess I was
wrong."
Then he turned his
back on Cett and walked out through the hole he had made. Vin
followed quietly, feet crunching splinters of wood as she slowly
withdrew, leaving a broken keep, shattered army, and humiliated lord
behind.
But must not
even a madman rely on his own mind, his own experience, rather than
that of others?





44
IN THE COLD CALM OF
morning, Breeze watched a very disheartening sight: Cett's army
withdrawing.
Breeze shivered,
breath puffing as he turned toward Clubs. Most people wouldn't have
been able to read beyond the sneer on the squat general's face. But
Breeze saw more: he saw the tension in the taut skin around Clubs's
eyes, he noticed the way that Clubs tapped his finger against the
frosty stone wall. Clubs was not a nervous man. The motions meant
something.
"This is it,
then?" Breeze asked quietly.
Clubs nodded.
Breeze couldn't see
it. There were still two armies out there; it was still a standoff.
Yet, he trusted Clubs's assessment. Or, rather, he trusted his own
knowledge of people enough to trust his assessment of Clubs.
The general knew
something he didn't.
"Kindly
explain," Breeze said.
"This'll end
when Straff figures it out," Clubs said.
"Figures what
out?"
"That those
koloss will do his job for him, if he lets them."
Breeze paused.
Straff doesn't really care about the people in the city—he
just wants to take it for the atium. And for the symbolic victory.
"If Straff
pulls back . . . " Breeze said.
"Those koloss
will attack," Clubs said with a nod. "They'll slaughter
everyone they find and generally make rubble out of the city. Then
Straff can come back and find his atium once the koloss are done."
"Assuming they
leave, my dear man."
Clubs shrugged.
"Either way, he's better off. Straff will face one weakened
enemy instead of two strong ones."
Breeze felt a
chill, and pulled his cloak closer. "You say that all so . . .
straightforwardly."
"We were dead
the moment that first army got here, Breeze," Clubs said. "We're
just good at stalling."
Why in the name
of the Lord Ruler do I spend my time with this man? Breeze
thought. He's nothing more than a pessimistic doomsayer. And
yet, Breeze knew people. This time, Clubs wasn't exaggerating.
"Bloody hell,"
Breeze muttered.
Clubs just nodded,
leaning against the wall and looking out at the disappearing army.
"Three hundred
men," Ham said, standing in Elend's study. "Or, at least,
that's what our scouts say."
"That's not as
bad as I'd feared," Elend said. They stood in Elend's study, the
only other occupant being Spook, who sat lounging beside the table.
"El," Ham
said, "Cett only had a thousand men with him here in Luthadel.
That means that during Vin's attack, Cett took thirty percent
casualties in less than ten minutes. Even on a battlefield,
most armies will break if they take thirty or forty percent
casualties in the course of an entire day's fighting."
"Oh,"
Elend said, frowning.
Ham shook his head,
sitting down, pouring himself something to drink. "I don't get
it, El. Why'd she attack him?"
"She's loony,"
Spook said.
Elend opened his
mouth to counter that comment, but found it difficult to explain his
feelings. "I'm not sure why she did it," he finally
admitted. "She did mention that she didn't believe those
assassins at the Assembly came from my father."
Ham shrugged. He
looked . . . haggard. This wasn't his element, dealing with armies
and worrying about the fate of kingdoms. He preferred to concern
himself with smaller spheres.
Of course,
Elend thought, I'd just prefer to be in my chair, reading quietly.
We do what we must.
"Any news of
her yet?" Elend asked.
Spook shook his
head. "Uncle Grumpy has the scouts searching the city, but so
far nothing."
"If Vin
doesn't want to be found . . . " Ham said.
Elend began to
pace. He couldn't keep still; he was beginning to think he must look
like Jastes, wandering in circles, running his hand through his hair.
Be firm, he
told himself. You can afford to seem worried, but you mustn't ever
seem uncertain.
He continued to
pace, though he slowed his step, and he didn't voice his concerns to
Ham or Spook. What if Vin was wounded? What if Cett had killed her?
Their scouts had seen very little of the attack the night before. Vin
had definitely been involved, and there were conflicting reports that
said she'd been fighting another Mistborn. She had left the keep with
one of the top floors in flames—and, for some reason, she had
left Cett alive.
Since then, nobody
had seen her.
Elend closed his
eyes, pausing as he leaned a hand against the stone wall. I've
been ignoring her lately. I've helped the city . . . but what good
will it do to save Luthadel if I lose her? It's almost like I don't
know her anymore.
Or did I ever
know her in the first place?
It felt wrong to
not have her with him. He had come to rely on her simple bluntness.
He needed her genuine realism—her sheer sense of
concreteness—to keep him grounded. He needed to hold her, so
that he could know that there was something more important than
theories and concepts.
He loved her.
"I don't know,
El," Ham finally said. "I never thought that Vin would be a
liability, but she had a hard youth. I remember once she exploded at
the crew for little reason, yelling and screaming about her
childhood. I . . . don't know that she's completely stable."
Elend opened his
eyes. "She's stable, Ham," he said firmly. "And she's
more capable than any of us."
Ham frowned. "But—"
"She had a
good reason for attacking Cett," Elend said. "I trust her."
Ham and Spook
exchanged glances, and Spook just shrugged.
"It's more
than last night, El," Ham said. "Something's not right with
that girl—not just mentally, either . . . ."
"What do you
mean?" Elend asked.
"Remember the
attack on the Assembly?" Ham said. "You told me you saw her
get hit square-on by a Thug's staff."
"And?"
Elend asked. "It laid her out for three full days."
Ham shook his head.
"Her complete collection of wounds—getting hit in the
side, the shoulder wound, nearly being choked to death—those
all together laid her out for a couple of days. But, if she'd really
gotten hit that hard by a Thug, she shouldn't have been out for days,
Elend. She should have been out for weeks. Maybe longer. She
certainly shouldn't have escaped without broken ribs."
"She was
burning pewter," Elend said.
"Presumably,
so was the Thug."
Elend paused.
"You see?"
Ham said. "If both were flaring pewter, then they should have
balanced each other out. That leaves Vin—a girl who can't weigh
more than a hundred pounds—getting clobbered full-on by a
trained soldier with three times her weight. She shrugged it off with
barely a few days' rest."
"Vin's
special," Elend finally said.
"I won't argue
with that," Ham said. "But she's also hiding things from
us. Who was that other Mistborn? Some of the reports make it sound
like they were working together."
She said there
was another Mistborn in the city, Elend thought. Zane—Straff's
messenger. She hasn't mentioned him in a very long while.
Ham rubbed his
forehead. "This is all falling apart around us, El."
"Kelsier could
have kept it together," Spook mumbled. "When he was here,
even our failures were part of his plan."
"The Survivor
is dead," Elend said. "I never knew him, but I've listened
to enough about him to learn one thing. He didn't give in to
despair."
Ham smiled. "That
much is true. He was laughing and joking the day after we lost our
entire army to a miscalculation. Arrogant bastard."
"Callous,"
Spook said.
"No," Ham
said, reaching for his cup. "I used to think that. Now . . . I
just think he was determined. Kell always looked toward tomorrow, no
matter what the consequences."
"Well, we have
to do the same," Elend said. "Cett is gone—Penrod let
him leave. We can't change that fact. But, we do have information on
the koloss army."
"Oh, about
that," Spook said, reaching into his pouch. He tossed something
to the table. "You're right—they're the same."
The coin rolled to
a stop, and Elend picked it up. He could see where Spook had scraped
it with a knife, peeling off the gold paint to reveal the dense
hardwood beneath. It was a poor representation of a boxing; it was
little wonder that the fakes had been so easy to pick out. Only a
fool would try to pass them off as real. A fool, or a koloss.
Nobody was certain
how some of Jastes's fake boxings had worked their way up to
Luthadel; perhaps he had tried giving them to peasants or beggars in
his home dominance. Either way, it was fairly apparent what he was
doing. He'd needed an army, and had needed cash. He'd fabricated the
one to get the other. Only koloss would have fallen for such a ploy.
"I don't get
it," Ham said as Elend passed him the coin. "How come the
koloss have suddenly decided to take money? The Lord Ruler never paid
them."
Elend paused,
thinking back to his experience with the camp. We are humans. We
will live in your city . . . .
"The koloss
are changing, Ham," Elend said. "Or maybe we never really
understood them in the first place. Either way, we need to be strong.
This isn't over yet."
"It would be
easier to be strong if I knew our Mistborn wasn't insane. She didn't
even discuss this with us!"
"I know,"
Elend said.
Ham rose, shaking
his head. "There's a reason the Great Houses were always so
reluctant to use their Mistborn against each other. Things just got a
whole lot more dangerous. If Cett does have a Mistborn, and he
decides to retaliate . . . "
"I know,"
Elend said again, bidding the two farewell.
Ham waved to Spook,
and the two of them left, off to check with Breeze and Clubs.
They all act so
glum, Elend thought, leaving his rooms to find something to eat.
It's like they think we're doomed because of one setback. But,
Cett's withdrawal is a good thing. One of our enemies is leaving—and
there are still two armies out there. Jastes won't attack if doing so
exposes him to Straff, and Straff himself is too scared of Vin to do
anything. In fact, her attack on Cett will only make my father more
frightened. Maybe that's why she did it.
"Your
Majesty?" a voice whispered.
Elend spun,
searching the hallway.
"Your
Majesty," said a short figure in the shadows. OreSeur. "I
think I've found her."
Elend didn't bring
anyone with him save for a few guards. He didn't want to explain to
Ham and the others how he'd gotten his information; Vin still
insisted on keeping OreSeur secret.
Ham's right
about one thing, Elend thought as his carriage pulled to a stop.
She is hiding things. She does it all the time.
But that didn't
stop him from trusting her. He nodded to OreSeur, and they left the
carriage. Elend waved his guards back as he approached a dilapidated
building. It had probably once been a poor merchant's shop—a
place run by extremely low nobility, selling meager necessities to
skaa workers in exchange for food tokens, which could in turn be
exchanged for money from the Lord Ruler.
The building was in
a sector that Elend's fuel-collection crews hadn't reached yet. It
was obvious, however, that it hadn't seen a lot of use lately. It had
been ransacked long ago, and the ash coating the floor was a good
four inches deep. A small trail of footprints led toward a back
stairwell.
"What is this
place?" Elend asked with a frown.
OreSeur shrugged a
pair of dog's shoulders.
"Then how did
you know she was here?"
"I followed
her last night, Your Majesty," OreSeur said. "I saw the
general direction she went. After that, it was simply a process of
careful searching."
Elend frowned.
"That still must have taken some pretty mean tracking abilities,
kandra."
"These bones
have unusually keen senses."
Elend nodded. The
stairwell led up into a long hallway with several rooms at the ends.
Elend began to walk down the hallway, then paused. To one side, a
panel on the wall had been slid back, revealing a small cubby. He
could hear movement within.
"Vin?" he
asked, poking his head into the cubby.
There was a small
room hidden behind the wall, and Vin sat on the far side. The
room—more of a nook—was only a few feet across, and even
Vin wouldn't have been able to stand up in it. She didn't respond to
him. She simply sat, leaning against the far wall, head turned away
from him.
Elend crawled
inside the small chamber, getting ash on his knees. It was barely
large enough for him to enter without bumping into her. "Vin?
Are you all right?"
She sat, twisting
something between her fingers. And she was looking at the
wall—looking through a narrow hole. Elend could see sunlight
shining through.
It's a peephole,
he realized. To watch the street below. This isn't a shop—it's
a thieving hideout. Or, it was.
"I used to
think Camon was a terrible man," Vin said quietly.
Elend paused, on
hands and knees. Finally, he settled back into a cramped seated
position. At least Vin didn't look hurt. "Camon?" he asked.
"Your old crewleader, before Kelsier?"
Vin nodded. She
turned away from the slit, sitting with her arms around her knees.
"He beat people, he killed those who disagreed with him. Even
among street thugs, he was brutal."
Elend frowned.
"But,"
Vin said quietly, "I doubt he killed as many people during his
entire life as I killed last night."
Elend closed his
eyes. Then he opened them and shuffled a little closer, laying a hand
on Vin's shoulder. "Those were enemy soldiers, Vin."
"I was like a
child in a room full of bugs," Vin whispered. He could finally
see what was in her fingers. It was her earring, the simple bronze
stud that she always wore. She looked down at it, twisting it between
her fingers.
"Did I ever
tell you how I got this?" she asked. He shook his head. "My
mother gave it to me," she said. "I don't remember it
happening—Reen told me about it. My mother . . . she heard
voices sometimes. She killed my baby sister, slaughtered her. And
that same day she gave me this, one of her own earrings. As if . . .
as if choosing me over my sister. A punishment for one, a twisted
present for another."
Vin shook her head.
"My entire life has been death, Elend. Death of my sister, the
death of Reen. Crewmembers dead around me, Kelsier falling to the
Lord Ruler, then my own spear in the Lord Ruler's chest. I try to
protect, and tell myself that I'm escaping it all. And then . . . I
do something like I did last night."
Not certain what
else to do, Elend pulled her close. She was stiff, however. "You
had a good reason for what you did," he said.
"No I didn't,"
Vin said. "I just wanted to hurt them. I wanted to scare them
and make them leave you alone. It sounds childish, but that's how I
felt."
"It's not
childish, Vin," Elend said. "It was good strategy. You gave
our enemies a show of force. You frightened away one of our major
opponents, and now my father will be even more afraid to attack.
You've bought us more time!"
"Bought it
with the lives of hundreds of men."
"Enemy
soldiers who marched into our city," Elend said. "Men who
were protecting a tyrant who oppresses his people."
"That's the
same rationale Kelsier used," Vin said quietly, "when he
killed noblemen and their guards. He said they were upholding the
Final Empire, so they deserved to die. He frightened me."
Elend didn't know
what to say to that.
"It was like
he thought himself a god," Vin whispered. "Taking life,
giving life, where he saw fit. I don't want to be like him, Elend.
But, everything seems to be pushing me in that direction."
"I . . . "
You're not like him, he wanted to say. It was true, but the
words wouldn't come out. They rang hollow to him.
Instead, he pulled
Vin close, her shoulder up against his chest, head beneath his chin.
"I wish I knew the right things to say, Vin," he whispered.
"Seeing you like this makes every protective instinct inside of
me twist. I want to make it better—I want to fix everything—but
I don't know how. Tell me what to do. Just tell me how I can help!"
She resisted his
embrace a little at first, but then sighed quietly and slid her arms
around him, holding him tightly. "You can't help with this,"
she said softly. "I have to do it alone. There are . . .
decisions I have to make."
He nodded. "You'll
make the right ones, Vin."
"You don't
even know what I'm deciding."
"It doesn't
matter," he said. "I know I can't help—I couldn't
even hold on to my own throne. You're ten times as capable as I am."
She squeezed his
arm. "Don't say things like that. Please?"
He frowned at the
tension in her voice, then nodded. "All right. But, either way,
I trust you, Vin. Make your decisions—I'll support you."
She nodded,
relaxing a bit beneath his arms. "I think . . . " she said.
"I think I have to leave Luthadel."
"Leave? And go
where?"
"North,"
she said. "To Terris."
Elend sat back,
resting against the wooden wall. Leave? he thought with a
twisting feeling. Is this what I've earned by being so distracted
lately?
Have I lost her?
And yet, he'd just
told her that he'd support her decisions. "If you feel you have
to go, Vin," he found himself saying, "then you should do
so."
"If I were to
leave, would you go with me?"
"Now?"
Vin nodded, head
rubbing his chest.
"No," he
finally said. "I couldn't leave Luthadel, not with those armies
still out there."
"But the city
rejected you."
"I know,"
he said, sighing. "But . . . I can't leave them, Vin. They
rejected me, but I won't abandon them."
Vin nodded again,
and something told him this was the answer she had expected.
Elend smiled.
"We're a mess, aren't we?"
"Hopeless,"
she said softly, sighing as she finally pulled away from him. She
seemed so tired. Outside the room, Elend could hear footsteps.
OreSeur appeared a moment later, poking his head into the hidden
chamber.
"Your guards
are growing restless, Your Majesty," he said to Elend. "They
will soon come looking for you."
Elend nodded,
shuffling over to the exit. Once in the hallway, he offered a hand to
help Vin out. She took the hand, crawling out, then stood and dusted
off her clothing—her typical shirt and trousers.
Will she ever go
back to dresses now? he wondered.
"Elend,"
she said, fishing in a pocket. "Here, you can spend this, if you
want."
She opened up her
hand, dropping a bead into his hand.
"Atium?"
he asked incredulously. "Where did you get it?"
"From a
friend," she said.
"And you
didn't burn it last night?" Elend asked. "When you were
fighting all those soldiers?"
"No," Vin
said. "I swallowed it, but I didn't end up needing it, so I
forced it back up."
Lord Ruler!
Elend thought. I didn't even consider that she didn't have atium.
What could she have done if she'd burned that bit? He looked up
at her. "Some reports say that there's another Mistborn in the
city."
"There is.
Zane."
Elend dropped the
bead back into her hand. "Then keep this. You might need it to
fight him."
"I doubt
that," Vin said quietly.
"Keep it
anyway," Elend said. "This is worth a small fortune—but
we'd need a very large fortune to make any difference now.
Besides, who would buy it? If I used it to bribe Straff or Cett,
they'd only become more certain I'm holding atium against them."
Vin nodded, then
glanced at OreSeur. "Keep this," she said, handing the bead
toward him. "It's big enough that another Allomancer could pull
it off me if he wanted."
"I will guard
it with my life, Mistress," OreSeur said, his shoulder splitting
open to make room for the bit of metal.
Vin turned to join
Elend as they walked down the steps, moving to meet with the guards
below.
I know what I
have memorized. I know what is now repeated by the other
Worldbringers.





45
"THE HERO OF
AGES WON'T be Terris," Tindwyl said, scribbling a note at the
bottom of their list.
"We knew that
already," Sazed said. "From the logbook."
"Yes,"
Tindwyl said, "but Alendi's account was only a reference—a
thirdhand mention of the effects of a prophecy. I found someone
quoting the prophecy itself."
"Truly?"
Sazed asked, excited. "Where?"
"The biography
of Helenntion," Tindwyl said. "One of the last survivors of
the Council of Khlennium."
"Write it for
me," Sazed said, scooting his chair a bit closer to hers. He had
to blink a few times as she wrote, his head clouding for a moment
from fatigue.
Stay alert!
he told himself. There isn't much time left. Not much at all . . .
.
Tindwyl was doing a
little better than he, but her wakefulness was obviously beginning to
run out, for she was starting to droop. He'd taken a quick nap during
the night, rolled up on her floor, but she had carried on. As far as
he could tell, she'd been awake for over a week straight.
There was much
talk of the Rabzeen, during those days, Tindwyl wrote. Some
said he would come to fight the Conqueror. Others said he was the
Conqueror. Helenntion didn't make his thoughts on the matter known to
me. The Rabzeen is said to be "He who is not of his people, yet
fulfills all of their wishes." If this is the case, then perhaps
the Conqueror is the one. He is said to have been of Khlennium.
She stopped there.
Sazed frowned, reading the words again. Kwaan's last testimony—the
rubbing Sazed had taken at the Conventical of Seran—had proven
useful in more than one way. It had provided a key.
It wasn't until
years later that I became convinced that he was the Hero of Ages,
Kwaan had written. Hero of Ages: the one called Rabzeen in
Khlennium, the Anamnesor . . . .
The rubbing was a
means of translation—not between languages, but between
synonyms. It made sense that there would be other names for the Hero
of Ages; a figure so important, so surrounded by lore, would have
many titles. Yet, so much had been lost from those days. The Rabzeen
and the Anamnesor were both mythological figures vaguely familiar to
Sazed—but they were only two among hosts. Until the discovery
of the rubbing, there had been no way to connect their names to the
Hero of Ages.
Now Tindwyl and he
could search their metalminds with open eyes. Perhaps, in the past,
Sazed had read this very passage from Helenntion's biography; he had
at least skimmed many of the older records, searching for religious
references. Yet, he would never have been able to realize that the
passage was referring to the Hero of Ages, a figure from Terris lore
that the Khlenni people had renamed into their own tongue.
"Yes . . . "
he said slowly. "This is good, Tindwyl. Very good." He
reached over, laying his hand on hers.
"Perhaps,"
she said, "though it tells us nothing new."
"Ah, but the
wording might be important, I think," Sazed said. "Religions
are often very careful with their writings."
"Especially
prophecies," Tindwyl said, frowning just a bit. She was not fond
of anything that smacked of superstition or soothsaying.
"I would have
thought," Sazed noted, "that you would no longer have this
prejudice, considering our current enterprise."
"I gather
information, Sazed," she said. "Because of what it says of
people, and because of what the past can teach us. However, there is
a reason I took to studying history as opposed to theology. I don't
approve of perpetuating lies."
"Is that what
you think I do when I teach of religions?" he asked in
amusement.
Tindwyl looked
toward him. "A bit," she admitted. "How can you teach
the people to look toward the gods of the dead, Sazed? Those
religions did their people little good, and their prophecies are now
dust."
"Religions are
an expression of hope," Sazed said. "That hope gives people
strength."
"Then you
don't believe?" Tindwyl asked. "You just give the people
something to trust, something to delude themselves?"
"I would not
call it so."
"Then you
think the gods you teach of do exist?"
"I . . . think
that they deserved to be remembered."
"And their
prophecies?" Tindwyl said. "I see scholarly value in what
we do—the bringing to light of facts from the past could give
us information about our current problems. Yet, this soothsaying for
the future is, at its core, foolishness."
"I would not
say that," Sazed said. "Religions are promises—promises
that there is something watching over us, guiding us. Prophecies,
therefore, are natural extensions of the hopes and desires of the
people. Not foolishness at all."
"So, your
interest is purely academic?" Tindwyl said.
"I wouldn't
say that."
Tindwyl studied
him, watching his eyes. She frowned slowly. "You believe it,
don't you?" she asked. "You believe that this girl is the
Hero of Ages."
"I have not
yet decided," Sazed said.
"How can you
even consider such a thing, Sazed?" Tindwyl asked. "Don't
you see? Hope is a good thing—a wonderful thing—but you
must have hope in something appropriate. If you perpetuate the dreams
of the past, then you stifle your own dreams of the future."
"What if the
past dreams are worthy of being remembered?"
Tindwyl shook her
head. "Look at the odds, Sazed. What are the chances we would
end up where we are, studying this rubbing, in the very same
household as the Hero of Ages?"
"Odds are
irrelevant when a foretelling is involved."
Tindwyl closed her
eyes. "Sazed . . . I think religion is a good thing, and belief
is a good thing, but it is foolishness to look for guidance in a few
vague phrases. Look at what happened last time someone assumed they
had found this Hero. The Lord Ruler, the Final Empire, was the
result."
"Still, I will
hope. If you did not believe the prophecies, then why work so hard to
discover information about the Deepness and the Hero?"
"It's simple,"
Tindwyl said. "We are obviously facing a danger that has come
before—a recurring problem, like a plague that plays itself
out, only to return again centuries later. The ancient people knew of
this danger, and had information about it. That information,
naturally, broke down and became legends, prophecies, and even
religions. There will be, then, clues to our situation hidden in the
past. This is not a matter of soothsaying, but of research."
Sazed lay his hand
on hers. "I think, perhaps, that this is something we cannot
agree upon. Come, let us return to our studies. We must use the time
we have left."
"We should be
all right," Tindwyl said, sighing and reaching to tuck a bit of
hair back into her bun. "Apparently, your Hero scared off Lord
Cett last night. The maid who brought breakfast was speaking of it."
"I know of the
event," Sazed said.
"Then things
are growing better for Luthadel."
"Yes,"
Sazed said. "Perhaps."
She frowned. "You
seem hesitant."
"I do not
know," he said, glancing down. "I do not feel that Cett's
departure is a good thing, Tindwyl. Something is very wrong. We need
to be finished with these studies."
Tindwyl cocked her
head. "How soon?"
"We should try
to be done tonight, I think," Sazed said, glancing toward the
pile of unbound sheets they had stacked on the table. That stack
contained all the notes, ideas, and connections that they'd made
during their furious bout of study. It was a book, of sorts—a
guidebook that told of the Hero of Ages and the Deepness. It was a
good document—incredible, even, considering the time they'd
been given. It was not comprehensive. It was, however, probably the
most important thing he'd ever written.
Even if he wasn't
certain why.
"Sazed?"
Tindwyl asked, frowning. "What is this?" She reached to the
stack of papers, pulling out a sheet that was slightly askew. As she
held it up, Sazed was shocked to see that a chunk from the bottom
right corner had been torn off.
"Did you do
this?" she asked.
"No,"
Sazed said. He accepted the paper. It was one of the transcriptions
of the rubbing; the tear had removed the last sentence or so. There
was no sign of the missing piece.
Sazed looked up,
meeting Tindwyl's confused gaze. She turned, shuffling through a
stack of papers to the side. She pulled out another copy of the
transcription and held it up.
Sazed felt a chill.
The corner was missing.
"I referenced
this yesterday," Tindwyl said quietly. "I haven't left the
room save for a few minutes since then, and you were always here."
"Did you leave
last night?" Sazed asked. "To visit the privy while I
slept?"
"Perhaps. I
don't remember."
Sazed sat for a
moment, staring at the page. The tear was eerily similar in shape to
the one from their main stack. Tindwyl, apparently thinking the same
thing, laid it over its companion. It matched perfectly; even the
smallest ridges in the tears were identical. Even if they'd been torn
lying right on top of one another, the duplication wouldn't have been
so perfect.
Both of them sat,
staring. Then they burst into motion, riffling through their stacks
of pages. Sazed had four copies of the transcription. All were
missing the same exact chunk.
"Sazed . . . "
Tindwyl said, her voice shaking just a bit. She held up a sheet of
paper—one that had only half of the transcription on it, ending
near the middle of the page. A hole had been torn directly in the
middle of the page, removing the exact same sentence.
"The rubbing!"
Tindwyl said, but Sazed was already moving. He left his chair,
rushing to the trunk where he stored his metalminds. He fumbled with
the key at his neck, pulling it off and unlocking the trunk. He threw
it open, removed the rubbing, then unfolded it delicately on the
ground. He withdrew his fingers suddenly, feeling almost as if he'd
been bitten, as he saw the tear at the bottom. The same sentence,
removed.
"How is this
possible?" Tindwyl whispered. "How could someone know so
much of our work—so much of us?"
"And yet,"
Sazed said, "how could they know so little of our abilities? I
have the entire transcription stored in my metalmind. I can remember
it right now."
"What does the
missing sentence say?"
"'Alendi must
not reach the Well of Ascension; he must not be allowed to take the
power for himself.'"
"Why remove
this sentence?" Tindwyl asked.
Sazed stared at the
rubbing. This seems impossible . . . .
A noise sounded at
the window. Sazed spun, reaching reflexively into his pewtermind and
increasing his strength. His muscles swelled, his robe growing tight.
The shutters swung
open. Vin crouched on the sill. She paused as she saw Sazed and
Tindwyl—who had also apparently tapped strength, growing to
have almost masculine bulk.
"Did I do
something wrong?" Vin asked.
Sazed smiled,
releasing his pewtermind. "No, child," he said. "You
simply startled us." He met Tindwyl's eye, and she began to
gather up the ripped pieces of paper. Sazed folded up the rubbing;
they would discuss it further later.
"Have you seen
anyone spending too much time around my room, Lady Vin?" Sazed
asked as he replaced the rubbing. "Any strangers—or even
any particular guards?"
"No," Vin
said, climbing into the room. She walked barefoot, as usual, and she
didn't wear her mistcloak; she rarely did in the daytime. If she had
fought the night before, she had changed clothing, for there were no
stains of blood—or even sweat—on this outfit. "Do
you want me to watch for anyone suspicious?" she asked.
"Yes, please,"
Sazed said, locking the chest. "We fear that someone has been
riffling through our work, though why they would wish to do so is
confusing."
Vin nodded,
remaining where she was as Sazed returned to his seat. She regarded
him and Tindwyl for a moment.
"I need to
talk to you, Sazed," Vin said.
"I can spare a
few moments, I think," Sazed said. "But, I must warn you
that my studies are very pressing."
Vin nodded, then
glanced at Tindwyl. Finally, she sighed, rising. "I guess I will
go and see about lunch, then."
Vin relaxed
slightly as the door closed; then she moved over to the table,
sitting down in Tindwyl's chair, pulling her legs up before her on
the wooden seat.
"Sazed,"
she asked, "how do you know if you're in love?"
Sazed blinked. "I
. . . I do not think I am one to speak on this topic, Lady
Vin. I know very little about it."
"You always
say things like that," Vin said. "But really, you're an
expert on just about everything."
Sazed chuckled. "In
this case, I assure you that my insecurity is heartfelt, Lady Vin."
"Still, you've
got to know something."
"A bit,
perhaps," Sazed said. "Tell me, how do you feel when you
are with young Lord Venture?"
"I want him to
hold me," Vin said quietly, turning to the side, looking out the
window. "I want him to talk to me, even if I don't understand
what he's saying. Anything to keep him there, with me. I want to be
better because of him."
"That seems
like a very good sign, Lady Vin."
"But . . . "
Vin glanced down. "I'm not good for him, Sazed. He's scared of
me."
"Scared?"
"Well, he's at
least uncomfortable with me. I saw the look in his eyes when he saw
me fighting on the day of the Assembly attack. He stumbled away from
me, Sazed, horrified."
"He'd just
seen a man slain," Sazed said. "Lord Venture is somewhat
innocent in these matters, Lady Vin. It wasn't you, I think—it
was simply a natural reaction to the horror of death."
"Either way,"
Vin said, glancing back out the window. "I don't want him to see
me that way. I want to be the girl he needs—the girl who can
support his political plans. The girl who can be pretty when he needs
her on his arm, and who can comfort him when he's frustrated. Except,
that's not me. You're the one who trained me to act like a courtly
woman, Saze, but we both know that I wasn't all that good at it."
"And Lord
Venture fell in love with you," Sazed said, "because you
didn't act like the other women. Despite Lord Kelsier's
interference, despite your knowledge that all noblemen were our
enemies, Elend fell in love with you."
"I shouldn't
have let him," Vin said quietly. "I need to stay away from
him, Saze—for his own good. That way, he can fall in love with
someone else. Someone who is a better match for him. Someone who
doesn't go kill a hundred people when she gets frustrated. Someone
who deserves his love."
Sazed rose, robes
swishing as he stepped to Vin's chair. He stooped down, placing his
head even with hers, laying a hand on her shoulder. "Oh, child.
When will you stop worrying and simply let yourself be loved?"
Vin shook her head.
"It's not that easy."
"Few things
are. Yet, I tell you this, Lady Vin. Love must be allowed to flow
both ways—if it is not, then it is not truly love, I think. It
is something else. Infatuation, perhaps? Either way, there are some
of us who are far too quick to make martyrs of ourselves. We stand at
the side, watching, thinking that we do the right thing by inaction.
We fear pain—our own, or that of another."
He squeezed her
shoulder. "But . . . is that love? Is it love to assume for
Elend that he has no place with you? Or, is it love to let him make
his own decision in the matter?"
"And if I'm
wrong for him?" Vin asked.
"You must love
him enough to trust his wishes, even if you disagree with them. You
must respect him—no matter how wrong you think he may be, no
matter how poor you think his decisions, you must respect his desire
to make them. Even if one of them includes loving you."
Vin smiled
slightly, but she still seemed troubled. "And . . . " she
said very slowly, "if there is someone else? For me?"
Ah . . . .
She tensed
immediately. "You mustn't tell Elend I said that."
"I won't,"
Sazed promised. "Who is this other man?"
Vin shrugged. "Just
. . . someone more like myself. The kind of man I should be
with."
"Do you love
him?"
"He's strong,"
Vin said. "He makes me think of Kelsier."
So there is
another Mistborn, Sazed thought. In this matter, he knew he
should remain unbiased. He didn't know enough about this second man
to make a judgment—and Keepers were supposed to give
information, but avoid specific advice.
Sazed, however, had
never been very good at following that rule. He didn't know this
other Mistborn, true, but he did know Elend Venture. "Child,"
he said, "Elend is the best of men, and you have been so much
happier since you've been with him."
"But, he's
really the first man I loved," Vin said quietly. "How do I
know it's right? Shouldn't I pay more attention to the man who is a
better match for me?"
"I don't know,
Lady Vin. I honestly don't know. I warned you of my ignorance in this
area. But, can you really hope to find a better person than Lord
Elend?"
She sighed. "It's
all so frustrating. I should be worrying about the city and the
Deepness, not which man to spend my evenings with!"
"It is hard to
defend others when our own lives are in turmoil," Sazed said.
"I just have
to decide," Vin said, standing, walking over toward the window.
"Thank you, Sazed. Thank you for listening . . . thank you for
coming back to the city."
Sazed nodded,
smiling. Vin shot backward out the open window, shoving herself
against some bit of metal. Sazed sighed, rubbing his eyes as he
walked over to the room's door and pulled it open.
Tindwyl stood
outside, arms crossed. "I think I would feel more comfortable in
this city," she said, "if I didn't know that our Mistborn
had the volatile emotions of a teenage girl."
"Lady Vin is
more stable than you think," Sazed said.
"Sazed, I've
raised some fifteen daughters," Tindwyl said, entering the room.
"No teenage girl is stable. Some are just better at
hiding it than others."
"Then, be glad
she didn't hear you eavesdropping," Sazed said. "She is
usually rather paranoid about such things."
"Vin has a
weak spot regarding Terris people," Tindwyl said with a wave of
her hand. "We can likely thank you for that. She seems to give
great value to your advice."
"Such as it
is."
"I thought
what you said was very wise, Sazed," Tindwyl said, sitting. "You
would have made an excellent father."
Sazed bowed his
head in embarrassment, then moved over to sit down. "We should—"
A knock came at the
door.
"Now what?"
Tindwyl asked.
"Did you not
order us lunch?"
Tindwyl shook her
head. "I never even left the hallway."
A second later,
Elend poked his head into the room. "Sazed? Could I talk to you
for a bit?"
"Of course,
Lord Elend," Sazed said, rising.
"Great,"
Elend said, striding into the room. "Tindwyl, you are excused."
She rolled her
eyes, shooting an exasperated glance at Sazed, but stood and walked
from the room.
"Thank you,"
Elend said as she shut the door. "Please, sit," he said,
waving to Sazed.
Sazed did so, and
Elend took a deep breath, standing with hands clasped behind his
back. He had gone back to his white uniforms, and stood with a
commanding posture despite his obvious frustration.
Someone stole my
friend the scholar away, Sazed thought, and left a king in his
place. "I assume this is about Lady Vin, Lord Elend?"
"Yes,"
Elend said, beginning to pace, gesturing with one hand as he spoke.
"She doesn't make any sense, Sazed. I expect that—hell, I
count on it. She's not just female, she's Vin. But, I'm left
unsure how to react. One minute she seems warm to me—like we
were before this mess hit the city—and the next minute she's
distant and stiff."
"Perhaps she's
just confused herself."
"Perhaps,"
Elend agreed. "But shouldn't at least one of us know what
is going on in our relationship? Honestly, Saze, sometimes I just
think we're too different to be together."
Sazed smiled. "Oh,
I don't know about that, Lord Elend. You may be surprised at how
similarly the two of you think."
"I doubt
that," Elend said, continuing to pace. "She's Mistborn; I'm
just a regular man. She grew up on the streets; I grew up in a
mansion. She is wily and clever; I'm book-learned."
"She is
extremely competent, and so are you," Sazed said. "She was
oppressed by her brother, you by your father. Both of you hated the
Final Empire, and fought it. And both of you think far too much about
what should be, rather than what is."
Elend paused,
looking at Sazed. "What does that mean?"
"It means that
I think you two are right for each other," Sazed said. "I
am not supposed to make such judgments, and truly, this is just the
opinion of a man who hasn't seen much of you two in the last few
months. But, I believe it to be true."
"And our
differences?" Elend asked.
"At first
glance, the key and the lock it fits may seem very different,"
Sazed said. "Different in shape, different in function,
different in design. The man who looks at them without knowledge of
their true nature might think them opposites, for one is meant to
open, and the other to keep closed. Yet, upon closer examination, he
might see that without one, the other becomes useless. The wise man
then sees that both lock and key were created for the same purpose."
Elend smiled. "You
need to write a book sometime, Sazed. That's as profound as anything
I've read."
Sazed flushed, but
glanced at the stack of papers on the desktop. Would they be his
legacy? He wasn't certain if they were profound, but they did
represent the most cohesive attempt that he'd ever made at writing
something original. True, most of the sheets contained quotes or
references, but a great deal of the text also included his thoughts
and annotations.
"So,"
Elend said, "what should I do?"
"About Lady
Vin?" Sazed asked. "I would suggest simply giving her—and
yourself—a little more time."
"Time is at a
premium these days, Saze."
"When is it
not?"
"When your
city isn't besieged by two armies," Elend said, "one of
them led by a megalomaniac tyrant, the other by a reckless fool."
"Yes,"
Sazed said slowly. "Yes, I think you may be right. I should
return to my studies."
Elend frowned.
"What are you working on, anyway?"
"Something
that has little relevance to your current problem, I fear,"
Sazed said. "Tindwyl and I are collecting and compiling
references about the Deepness and the Hero of Ages."
"The Deepness
. . . Vin mentioned it, too. You really think it might return?"
"I think it
has returned, Lord Elend," Sazed said. "It never left,
really. I believe the Deepness was—is—the mists."
"But, why . .
. " Elend said, then held up a hand. "I'll read your
conclusions when you have finished. I can't afford to get sidetracked
right now. Thank you, Sazed, for your advice."
Yes, a king
indeed, Sazed thought.
"Tindwyl,"
Elend said, "you may come back in now. Sazed, good day."
Elend turned toward the door, and it cracked open slowly. Tindwyl
strode in, hiding her embarrassment.
"How did you
know I was out there?" she asked.
"I guessed,"
Elend said. "You're as bad as Vin. Anyway, good day, both of
you."
Tindwyl frowned as
he left; then she glanced at Sazed.
"You really
did do a fine job with him," Sazed said.
"Too fine a
job," Tindwyl said, sitting. "I actually think that if the
people had let him remain in command, he might have found a way to
save the city. Come, we must return to work—this time, I
actually did send someone for lunch, so we should get as much done as
possible before it arrives."
Sazed nodded,
seating himself and picking up his pen. Yet, he found it difficult to
focus on his work. His mind kept returning to Vin and Elend. He
wasn't certain why it was so important to him that they make their
relationship work. Perhaps it was simply because they were both
friends of his, and he wished to see them happy.
Or perhaps there
was something else. Those two were the best Luthadel had to offer.
The most powerful Mistborn of the skaa underground, and the most
noble leader of the aristocratic culture. They needed each other, and
the Final Empire needed them both.
Plus, there was the
work he was doing. The specific pronoun used in much of the Terris
prophetic language was gender neutral. The actual word meant "it,"
though it was commonly translated into modern tongues as "he."
Yet each "he" in his book could also have been written as
"she." If Vin really was the Hero of Ages . . .
I need to find a
way to get them out of the city, Sazed thought, a sudden
realization washing over him. Those two must not be here when
Luthadel falls.
He put aside his
notes and immediately began writing a quick series of letters.
The two are not
the same.





46
BREEZE COULD SMELL
INTRIGUE FROM two streets away. Unlike many of his fellow thieves, he
hadn't grown up impoverished, nor had he been forced to live in the
underground. He'd grown up in a place far more cutthroat: an
aristocratic court. Fortunately, the other crewmembers didn't treat
him differently because of his full-blooded noble origin.
That was, of
course, because they didn't know about it.
His upbringing
afforded him certain understandings. Things that he doubted any skaa
thief, no matter how competent, knew. Skaa intrigue made a brutal
kind of sense; it was a matter of naked life and death. You betrayed
your allies for money, for power, or to protect yourself.
In the noble
courts, intrigue was more abstract. Betrayals wouldn't often end with
either party dead, but the ramifications could span generations. It
was a game—so much of one, in fact, that the young Breeze had
found the open brutality of the skaa underground to be refreshing.
He sipped his warm
mug of mulled wine, eyeing the note in his fingers. He'd come to
believe that he wouldn't have to worry about intracrew conspiracies
anymore: Kelsier's crew was an almost sickeningly tight group, and
Breeze did everything within his Allomantic powers to keep it that
way. He'd seen what infighting could do to a family.
That was why he was
so surprised to receive this letter. Despite its mock innocence, he
could easily pick out the signs. The hurried pace of the writing,
smudged in places but not rewritten. Phrases like "No need to
tell others of this" and "do not wish to cause alarm."
The extra drops of sealing wax, spread gratuitously on the lip of the
letter, as if to give extra protection against prying eyes.
There was no
mistaking the tone of the missive. Breeze had been invited to a
conspiratorial conference. But, why in the Lord Ruler's name would
Sazed, of all people, want to meet in secret?
Breeze sighed,
pulling out his dueling cane and using it to steady himself. He grew
light-headed sometimes when he stood; it was a minor malady he'd
always had, though it seemed to have grown worse during the last few
years. He glanced over his shoulder as his vision cleared, toward
where Allrianne slept in his bed.
I should
probably feel more guilty about her, he thought, smiling despite
himself and reaching to put his vest and jacket on over his trousers
and shirt. But . . . well, we're all going to be dead in a few
days anyway. An afternoon spent speaking with Clubs could
certainly put one's life in perspective.
Breeze wandered out
into the hallway, making his way though the gloomy, inadequately lit
Venture passageways. Honestly, he thought, I understand the
value in saving lamp oil, but things are depressing enough right now
without the dark corridors.
The meeting place
was only a few short twists away. Breeze located it easily because of
the two soldiers standing watch outside the door. Demoux's
men—soldiers who reported to the captain religiously, as well
as vocationally.
Interesting,
Breeze thought, remaining hidden in the side hallway. He quested out
with his Allomantic powers and Soothed the men, taking away their
relaxation and certainty, leaving behind anxiety and nervousness. The
guards began to grow restless, shuffling. Finally, one turned and
opened the door, checking on the room inside. The motion gave Breeze
a full view of the room's contents. Only one man sat within. Sazed.
Breeze stood
quietly, trying to decide his next course of action. There was
nothing incriminating in the letter; this couldn't all simply be a
trap on Elend's part, could it? An obscure attempt at finding out
which crewmembers would betray him and which wouldn't? Seemed like
too distrustful a move for the good-natured boy. Besides, if that
were the case, Sazed would have to try and get Breeze to do more than
simply meet in a clandestine location.
The door swung
closed, the soldier returning to his place. I can trust Sazed,
can't I? Breeze thought. But, if that was the case, why the quiet
meeting? Was Breeze overreacting?
No, the guards
proved that Sazed worried about this meeting being discovered. It was
suspicious. If it were anyone else, Breeze would have gone straight
to Elend. But Sazed . . .
Breeze sighed, then
wandered into the hallway, dueling cane clicking against the floor.
Might as well see what he has to say. Besides, if he is planning
something devious, it'd almost be worth the danger to see it.
Despite the letter, despite the strange circumstances, Breeze had
trouble imagining a Terrisman being involved in something that wasn't
completely honest.
Perhaps the Lord
Ruler had had the same problem.
Breeze nodded to
the soldiers, Soothing away their anxiety and restoring them to a
more temperate humor. There was another reason why he was willing to
chance the meeting. Breeze was only just beginning to realize how
dangerous his predicament was. Luthadel would soon fall. Every
instinct he'd nurtured during thirty years in the underground was
telling him to run.
That feeling made
him more likely to take risks. The Breeze of a few years earlier
would already have abandoned the city. Damn you, Kelsier, he
thought as he pushed open the door.
Sazed looked up
with surprise from his table. The room was sparse, with several
chairs and only two lamps. "You're early, Lord Breeze,"
Sazed said, standing quickly.
"Of course I
am," Breeze snapped. "I had to make certain this wasn't a
trap of some sort." He paused. "This isn't a trap of some
sort, right?"
"Trap?"
Sazed asked. "What are you talking about?"
"Oh, don't
sound so shocked," Breeze said. "This is no simple
meeting."
Sazed wilted
slightly. "It's . . . that obvious, is it?"
Breeze sat, laying
his cane across his lap, and eyed Sazed tellingly, Soothing the man
to make him feel a little more self-conscious. "You may have
helped us overthrow the Lord Ruler, my dear man—but you have a
lot to learn about being sneaky."
"I apologize,"
Sazed said, sitting. "I simply wanted to meet quickly, to
discuss certain . . . sensitive issues."
"Well, I'd
recommend getting rid of those guards," Breeze said. "They
make the room stand out. Then, light a few more lamps and get us
something to eat or drink. If Elend walks in—I assume it's
Elend we're hiding from?"
"Yes."
"Well, if he
comes and sees us sitting here in the dark, eyeing each other
insidiously, he'll know something is up. The less natural the
occasion, the more natural you want to appear."
"Ah, I see,"
Sazed said. "Thank you."
The door opened and
Clubs hobbled in. He eyed Breeze, then Sazed, then wandered over
toward a chair. Breeze glanced at Sazed—no surprise there.
Clubs was obviously invited as well.
"Lose those
guards," Clubs snapped.
"Immediately,
Lord Cladent," Sazed said, standing and shuffling over to the
door. He spoke briefly with the guards, then returned. As Sazed was
sitting, Ham poked his head into the room, looking suspicious.
"Wait a
minute," Breeze said. "How many people are coming to this
secret meeting?"
Sazed gestured for
Ham to sit. "All of the more . . . experienced members of the
crew."
"You mean
everyone but Elend and Vin," Breeze said.
"I did not
invite Lord Lestibournes either," Sazed said.
Yes, but Spook
isn't the one we're hiding from.
Ham sat down
hesitantly, shooting a questioning glance at Breeze. "So . . .
why exactly are we meeting behind the backs of our Mistborn and our
king?"
"King no
longer," a voice noted from the door. Dockson walked in and sat.
"In fact, it could be argued that Elend isn't leader of this
crew anymore. He fell into that position by happenstance—just
like he fell into the throne."
Ham flushed. "I
know you don't like him, Dox, but I'm not here to talk treason."
"There's no
treason if there's no throne to betray," Dockson said, sitting.
"What are we going to do—stay here and be servants in his
house? Elend doesn't need us. Perhaps it's time to transfer our
services to Lord Penrod."
"Penrod is a
nobleman, too," Ham said. "You can't tell me you like him
any better than you do Elend."
Dockson thumped the
table quietly with his fist. "It's not about who I like,
Ham. It's about seeing that this damn kingdom Kelsier threw at us
remains standing! We've spent a year and a half cleaning up his mess.
Do you want to see that work wasted?"
"Please,
gentlemen," Sazed said, trying—without success—to
break into the conversation.
"Work, Dox?"
Ham said, flushed. "What work have you done? I haven't seen you
do much of anything besides sit and complain every time someone
offers a plan."
"Complain?"
Dockson snapped. "Do you have any idea how much administrative
work it has taken to keep this city from falling upon itself? What
have you done, Ham? You refused to take command of the army. All you
do is drink and spar with your friends!"
That's enough of
that, Breeze thought, Soothing the men. At this rate, we'll
strangle each other before Straff can have us executed.
Dockson settled
back in his chair, waving a dismissive hand at Ham, who still sat
red-faced. Sazed waited, obviously chagrined by the outbreak. Breeze
Soothed away his insecurity. You're in charge here, Sazed. Tell us
what is going on.
"Please,"
Sazed said. "I did not bring us together so that we could argue.
I understand that you are all tense—that is understandable,
considering the circumstances."
"Penrod is
going to give our city to Straff," Ham said.
"That's better
than letting him slaughter us," Dockson countered.
"Actually,"
Breeze said, "I don't think we have to worry about Straff
slaughtering us."
"No?"
Dockson asked, frowning. "Do you have some information you
haven't been sharing with us, Breeze?"
"Oh, get over
yourself, Dox," Ham snapped. "You've never been happy that
you didn't end up in charge when Kell died. That's the real reason
you never liked Elend, isn't it?"
Dockson flushed,
and Breeze sighed, slapping both of them with a powerful blanket
Soothing. They both jumped slightly, as if they'd been stung—though
the sensation would be quite the opposite. Their emotions, once
volatile, would suddenly have become numb and unresponsive.
Both looked at
Breeze.
"Yes," he
said, "of course I'm Soothing you. Honestly, I know Hammond is a
bit immature—but you, Dockson?"
Dockson sat back,
rubbing his forehead. "You can let go, Breeze," he said
after a moment. "I'll keep my tongue."
Ham just grumbled,
settling one hand on the table. Sazed watched the exchange with a
little bit of shock.
This is what
cornered men are like, my dear Terrisman, Breeze thought. This
is what happens when they lose hope. They might be able to keep up
appearances in front of the soldiers, but put them alone with their
friends . . .
Sazed was a
Terrisman; his entire life had been one of oppression and loss. But
these men, Breeze himself included, were accustomed to success. Even
against overwhelming odds, they were confident. They were the type of
men who could go up against a god, and expect to win. They wouldn't
deal well with losing. Of course, when losing meant death, who would?
"Straff's
armies are getting ready to break camp," Clubs finally said.
"He's doing it subtly, but the signs are there."
"So, he's
coming for the city," Dockson said. "My men in Penrod's
palace say the Assembly has been sending missive after missive to
Straff, all but begging him to come take up occupation of Luthadel."
"He's not
going to take the city," Clubs said. "At least, not if he's
smart."
"Vin is still
a threat," Breeze said. "And it doesn't look like Straff
has a Mistborn to protect him. If he came into Luthadel, I doubt
there is a single thing he could do to keep her from slitting his
throat. So, he'll do something else."
Dockson frowned,
and glanced at Ham, who shrugged.
"It's really
quite simple," Breeze said, tapping the table with his dueling
cane. "Why, even I figured it out." Clubs snorted at this.
"If Straff makes it look like he's withdrawing, the koloss will
probably attack Luthadel for him. They're too literal to understand
the threat of a hidden army."
"If Straff
withdraws," Clubs said, "Jastes won't be able to keep them
from the city."
Dockson blinked.
"But they'd . . . "
"Slaughter?"
Clubs asked. "Yes. They'd pillage the richest sectors of the
town—probably end up killing most of the noblemen in the city."
"Eliminating
the men that Straff has been forced—against his will, knowing
that man's pride—to work with," Breeze added. "In
fact, there's a good chance the creatures will kill Vin. Can you
imagine her not joining the fight if koloss broke in?"
The room fell
silent.
"But, that
doesn't really help Straff get the city," Dockson said. "He'll
still have to fight the koloss."
"Yes,"
Clubs said, scowling. "But, they'll probably take down some of
the city gates, not to mention level a lot of the homes. That will
leave Straff with a clear field to attack a weakened foe. Plus,
koloss don't strategize—for them, city walls won't be much
help. Straff couldn't ask for a better setup."
"He'd be seen
as a liberator," Breeze said quietly. "If he returns at the
right time—after the koloss have broken into the city and
fought the soldiers, but before they've done serious damage to the
skaa quarter—he could free the people and establish himself as
their protector, not their conqueror. Knowing how the people feel, I
think they'd welcome him. Right now, a strong leader would mean more
to them than coins in their pockets and rights in the Assembly."
As the group
thought on this, Breeze eyed Sazed, who still sat quietly. He'd said
so little; what was his game? Why gather the crew? Was he subtle
enough to know that they'd simply needed to have an honest discussion
like this, without Elend's morals to clutter things up?
"We could just
let Straff have it," Dockson finally said. "The city, I
mean. We could promise to call Vin off. If that is where this is
heading anyway . . . "
"Dox,"
Ham said quietly, "what would Kell think, to hear you talk like
that?"
"We could give
the city to Jastes Lekal," Breeze said. "Perhaps he can be
persuaded to treat the skaa with dignity."
"And let
twenty thousand koloss into the city?" Ham asked. "Breeze,
have you ever seen what those things can do?"
Dockson pounded the
table. "I'm just giving options, Ham. What else are we going to
do?"
"Fight,"
Clubs said. "And die."
The room fell
silent again.
"You sure know
how to kill a conversation, my friend," Breeze finally said.
"It needed to
be said," Clubs muttered. "No use fooling yourselves
anymore. We can't win a fight, and a fight is where this was always
going. The city is going to get attacked. We're going to defend it.
And we'll lose.
"You wonder if
we should just give up. Well, we're not going to do that. Kell
wouldn't let us, and so we won't let ourselves. We'll fight, and
we'll die with dignity. Then, the city will burn—but we'll have
said something. The Lord Ruler pushed us around for a thousand years,
but now we skaa have pride. We fight. We resist. And we die."
"What was this
all worth, then?" Ham said with frustration. "Why overthrow
the Final Empire? Why kill the Lord Ruler? Why do anything, if it was
just going to end like this? Tyrants ruling every dominance, Luthadel
smashed to rubble, our crew dead?"
"Because,"
Sazed said softly, "someone had to begin it. While the Lord
Ruler ruled, society could not progress. He kept a stabilizing hand
on the empire, but it was an oppressive hand as well. Fashion stayed
remarkably unchanged for a thousand years, the noblemen always trying
to fit the Lord Ruler's ideals. Architecture and science did not
progress, for the Lord Ruler frowned on change and invention.
"And the skaa
could not be free, for he would not let them. However, killing him
did not free our peoples, my friends. Only time will do that. It will
take centuries, perhaps—centuries of fighting, learning, and
growth. At the beginning, unfortunately and unavoidably, things will
be very difficult. Worse even than they were beneath the Lord Ruler."
"And we die
for nothing," Ham said with a scowl.
"No,"
Sazed said. "Not nothing, Lord Hammond. We will die to show that
there are skaa who will not be bullied, who will not back down. This
is a very important precedent, I think. In the histories and legends,
this is the kind of event that inspires. If the skaa are ever to take
rule of themselves, there will need to be sacrifices they can look to
for motivation. Sacrifices like that of the Survivor himself."
The men sat in
silence.
"Breeze,"
Ham said, "I could use a little more confidence right now."
"Of course,"
Breeze said, carefully Soothing away the man's anxiety and fear. His
face lost some of its pale pallor, and he sat up a little straighter.
Just for good measure, Breeze gave the rest of the crew a little of
the same treatment.
"How long have
you known?" Dockson asked Sazed.
"For some time
now, Lord Dockson," Sazed said.
"But, you
couldn't have known that Straff would pull back and give us to the
koloss. Only Clubs figured that out."
"My knowledge
was general, Lord Breeze," Sazed said in his even voice. "It
did not relate to the koloss specifically. I have thought for some
time that this city would fall. In all honesty, I am deeply impressed
with your efforts. This people should long since have been defeated,
I think. You have done something grand—something that will be
remembered for centuries."
"Assuming
anyone survives to tell the story," Clubs noted.
Sazed nodded.
"That, actually, is why I called this gathering. There is little
chance of those of us who remain in the city surviving—we will
be needed to help with defenses, and if we do survive the koloss
attack, Straff will try to execute us. However, it is not necessary
for us all to remain in Luthadel for its fall—someone,
perhaps, should be sent out to organize further resistance against
the warlords."
"I won't leave
my men," Clubs grumbled.
"Nor I,"
Ham said. "Though I did send my family to ground
yesterday." The simple phrase meant that he'd had them leave,
perhaps to hide in the city's underground, perhaps to escape through
one of the passwalls. Ham wouldn't know—and that way he
couldn't betray their location. Old habits died hard.
"If this city
falls," Dockson said, "I'll be here with it. That's what
Kell would expect. I'm not leaving."
"I'll go,"
Breeze said, looking at Sazed. "Is it too early to volunteer?"
"Um, actually,
Lord Breeze," Sazed said, "I wasn't—"
Breeze held up a
hand. "It's all right, Sazed. I believe it's obvious whom you
think should be sent away. You didn't invite them to the meeting."
Dockson frowned.
"We're going to defend Luthadel to the death, and you want to
send away our only Mistborn?"
Sazed nodded his
head. "My lords," he said softly, "the men of this
city will need our leadership. We gave them this city and put them in
this predicament. We cannot abandon them now. But . . . there are
great things at work in this world. Greater things than us, I think.
I am convinced that Mistress Vin is part of them.
"Even if these
matters are delusions on my part, then Lady Vin still must not
be allowed to die in this city. She is the people's most personal and
powerful link to the Survivor. She has become a symbol to them, and
her skills as a Mistborn give her the best chance of being able to
get away, then survive the attacks Straff will undoubtedly send. She
will be a great value in the fight to come—she can move quickly
and stealthily, and can fight alone, doing much damage, as she proved
last night."
Sazed bowed his
head. "My lords, I called you here today so that we could decide
how to convince her to run, when the rest of us stay to fight. It
will not be an easy task, I think."
"She won't
leave Elend," Ham said. "He'll have to go, too."
"My thoughts
as well, Lord Hammond," Sazed said.
Clubs chewed his
lip in thought. "That boy won't be easily convinced to flee. He
still thinks we can win this fight."
"And we may
yet," Sazed said. "My lords, my purpose is not to leave you
without any hope at all. But, the dire circumstances, the likelihood
of success . . . "
"We know,
Sazed," Breeze said. "We understand."
"There have to
be others of the crew who can go," Ham said, looking down. "More
than just the two."
"I would send
Tindwyl with them," Sazed said. "She will carry to my
people many discoveries of great importance. I also plan to send Lord
Lestibournes. He would do little good in the battle, and his
abilities as a spy could be of help to Lady Vin and Lord Elend as
they try to rally resistance among the skaa.
"However,
those four will not be the only ones who survive. Most of the skaa
should be safe—Jastes Lekal seems to be able to control his
koloss somehow. Even if he cannot, then Straff should arrive in time
to protect the city's people."
"Assuming
Straff is planning what Clubs thinks he is," Ham said. "He
could actually be withdrawing, cutting his losses and leaving
Luthadel behind."
"Either way,"
Clubs said. "Not many can get out. Neither Straff nor Jastes are
likely to allow large groups of people to flee the city. Right now,
confusion and fear in the streets will serve their purposes far
better than depopulation. We might be able to get a few riders on
horseback out—especially if one of those riders is Vin. The
rest of the people will have to take their chances with the koloss."
Breeze felt his
stomach turn. Clubs spoke so bluntly . . . so callously. But that was
Clubs. He wasn't even really a pessimist; he just said the things
that he didn't think others wanted to acknowledge.
Some of the skaa
will survive to become slaves for Straff Venture, Breeze thought.
But those who fight—and those who have led the city this
last year—are doomed. That includes me.
It's true. This
time there really is no way out.
"Well?"
Sazed asked, hands spread before him. "Are we in agreement that
these four should go?"
The members of the
group nodded.
"Let us
discuss, then," Sazed said, "and devise a plan for sending
them away."
"We could just
make Elend think that the danger isn't that great," Dockson
said. "If he believes that the city is in for a long siege, he
might be willing to go with Vin on a mission somewhere. They wouldn't
realize what was happening back here until it was too late."
"A good
suggestion, Lord Dockson," Sazed said. "I think, also, that
we could work with Vin's concept of the Well of Ascension."
The discussion
continued, and Breeze sat back, satisfied. Vin, Elend, and Spook
will survive, he thought. I'll have to convince Sazed to let
Allrianne go with them. He glanced around the room, noticing a
release of tension in the postures of the others. Dockson and Ham
seemed at peace, and even Clubs was nodding quietly to himself,
looking satisfied as they talked through suggestions.
The disaster was
still coming. But, somehow, the possibility that some would
escape—the youngest crewmembers, the ones still inexperienced
enough to hope—made everything else a little easier to accept.
Vin stood quietly
in the mists, looking up at the dark spires, columns, and towers of
Kredik Shaw. In her head, two sounds thumped. The mist spirit and the
larger, vaster sound.
It was growing more
and more demanding.
She continued
forward, ignoring the thumps as she approached Kredik Shaw. The Hill
of a Thousand Spires, once home of the Lord Ruler. It had been
abandoned for well over a year, but no vagrants had made their home
here. It was too ominous. Too terrible. Too much a reminder of him.
The Lord Ruler had
been a monster. Vin remembered well the night, over a year before,
when she had come to this palace intending to kill him. To do the job
that Kelsier had unwittingly trained her to do. She had walked
through this very courtyard, had passed guards at the doors before
her.
And she had let
them live. Kelsier would have just fought his way in. But Vin had
talked them into leaving, into joining the rebellion. That act had
saved her life when one of those very men, Goradel, had led Elend to
the palace dungeons to help rescue Vin.
In a way, the Final
Empire had been overthrown because she hadn't acted like
Kelsier.
And yet, could she
base future decisions upon a coincidence like that? Looking back, it
seemed too perfectly allegorical. Like a neat little tale told to
children, intended to teach a lesson.
Vin had never heard
those tales as a child. And, she had survived when so many others had
died. For every lesson like the one with Goradel, it seemed that
there were a dozen that ended in tragedy.
And then there was
Kelsier. He'd been right, in the end. His lesson was very different
from the ones taught by the children's tales. Kelsier had been bold,
even excited, when he executed those who stood in his path. Ruthless.
He had looked toward the greater good; he'd always had his eyes
focused on the fall of the empire, and the eventual rise of a kingdom
like Elend's.
He had succeeded.
Why couldn't she kill as he had, knowing she was doing her duty,
never feeling guilt? She'd always been frightened by the edge of
danger Kelsier had displayed. Yet, wasn't that very edge the thing
that had let him succeed?
She passed into the
tunnel-like corridors of the palace, feet and mistcloak tassels
trailing marks in the dust. The mists, as always, remained behind.
They didn't enter buildings—or, if they did, they usually
didn't remain for long. With them, she left behind the mist spirit.
She had to make a
decision. She didn't like the decision, but she was accustomed to
doing things she didn't like. That was life. She hadn't wanted to
fight the Lord Ruler, but she had.
It soon became too
dark even for Mistborn eyes, and she had to light a lantern. When she
did, she was surprised to see that her footsteps weren't the only
ones in the dust. Apparently, someone else had been haunting the
corridors. However, whoever it was, she didn't encounter them as she
walked through the hallways.
She entered the
chamber a few moments later. She wasn't sure what had drawn her to
Kredik Shaw, let alone the hidden chamber at its center. It seemed,
however, that she had been feeling a kinship with the Lord Ruler
lately. Her walkings had brought her here, to a place she hadn't
visited since that night when she'd slain the only God she'd ever
known.
He had spent a lot
of time in this hidden chamber, a place he had apparently built to
remind him of his homeland. The chamber had a domed roof that arced
overhead. The walls were filled with silvery murals and the floor was
filled with metallic inlays. She ignored these, walking forward
toward the room's central feature—a small stone building that
had been built within the larger chamber.
It was here that
Kelsier and his wife had been captured many years before, during
Kelsier's first attempt to rob the Lord Ruler. Mare had been murdered
at the Pits. But Kelsier had survived.
It was here, in
this same chamber, that Vin had first faced an Inquisitor, and had
nearly been killed herself. It was also here that she had come months
later in her first attempt to kill the Lord Ruler. She had been
defeated that time, too.
She stepped into
the small building-within-a-building. It had only one room. The floor
had been torn up by Elend's crews, searching for the atium. The walls
were still hung, however, with the trappings the Lord Ruler had left
behind. She raised her lantern, looking at them.
Rugs. Furs. A small
wooden flute. The things of his people, the Terris people, from a
thousand years before. Why had he built his new city of Luthadel
here, to the south, when his homeland—and the Well of Ascension
itself—had been to the north? Vin had never really understood
that.
Perhaps it came
down to decision. Rashek, the Lord Ruler, had been forced to make a
decision, too. He could have continued as he was, the pastoral
villager. He would probably have had a happy life with his people.
But he had decided
to become something more. In doing so, he had committed terrible
atrocities. Yet, could she blame him for the decision itself? He had
become what he'd thought he needed to be.
Her decision seemed
more mundane, but she knew that other things—the Well of
Ascension, the protection of Luthadel—could not be considered
until she was certain what she wanted and who she was. And yet,
standing in that room where Rashek had spent much of his time,
thinking about the Well, the demanding thumps in her head sounded
louder than they ever had before.
She had to decide.
Elend was the one she wanted to be with. He represented peace.
Happiness. Zane, however, represented what she felt she had to
become. For the good of everyone involved.
The Lord Ruler's
palace held no clues or answers for her. A few moments later,
frustrated and baffled at why she had even come, she left it behind,
walking back out into the mists.
Zane awoke to the
sound of a tent spike being pounded in a specific rhythm. His
reaction was immediate.
He burned steel and
pewter. He always swallowed a new bit of each before sleeping. He
knew the habit would probably kill him someday; metals were poisonous
if allowed to linger.
Dying someday was
better, in Zane's opinion, than dying today.
He flipped out of
his cot, tossing his blanket toward the opening tent flap. He could
barely see in the darkness of night. Even as he jumped, he heard
something ripping. The tent walls being slit.
"Kill them!"
God screamed.
Zane thumped to the
ground and grabbed a handful of coins from the bowl beside his bed.
He heard cries of surprise as he spun, throwing coins in a spinning
spray around him.
He Pushed. Tiny
plunks of sound thumped around him as coins met canvas, then
continued on.
And men began to
scream.
Zane fell to a
crouch, waiting silently as the tent collapsed around him. Someone
was thrashing the cloth to his right. He shot a few coins, and heard
a satisfying grunt of pain. In the stillness, canvas resting atop him
like a blanket, he heard footsteps running away.
He sighed,
relaxing, and used a dagger to slice away the top of his tent. He
emerged to a misty night. He'd gone to sleep later today than he
usually did; it was probably near midnight. Time to be up anyway.
He strode across
the fallen top of his tent—moving over to the now cloaked form
of his cot—and cut a hole so he could reach through and pluck
out the vial of metal he'd stored in a pocket beneath it. He downed
the metals, and tin brought near light to his surroundings. Four men
lay dying or dead around his tent. They were soldiers, of
course—Straff's soldiers. The attack had come later than Zane
had expected.
Straff trusts me
more than I assumed. Zane stepped over the dead form of an
assassin and cut his way into a storage chest, then pulled out his
clothing. He changed quietly, then removed a small bag of coins from
the chest. It must have been the attack on Cett's keep, he
thought. It finally convinced Straff that I was too dangerous to
let live.
Zane found his man
working quietly beside a tent a short distance away, ostensibly
testing the strength of a tent cord. He watched every night, paid to
pound on a tent spike should anyone approach Zane's tent. Zane tossed
the man a bag of coins, then moved off into the darkness, passing the
canal waters with their supply barges on his way to Straff's tent.
His father had some
few limitations. Straff was fine at large-scale planning, but the
details—the subtleties—often got away from him. He could
organize an army and crush his enemies. He, however, liked to play
with dangerous tools. Like the atium mines at the Pits of Hathsin.
Like Zane.
Those tools often
ended up burning him.
Zane walked up to
the side of Straff's tent, then ripped a hole in the canvas and
strode in. Straff waited for him. Zane gave the man credit: Straff
watched his death coming with defiance in his eyes. Zane stopped in
the middle of the room, in front of Straff, who sat in his hard
wooden chair.
"Kill him,"
God commanded.
Lamps burned in the
corners, illuminating the canvas. The cushions and blankets in the
corner were rumpled; Straff had taken one last romp with his favorite
mistresses before sending his assassins. The king displayed his
characteristic air of strong defiance, but Zane saw more. He saw a
face too slick with sweat, and he saw hands trembling, as if from a
disease.
"I have atium
for you," Straff said. "Buried in a place only I know."
Zane stood quietly,
staring at his father.
"I will
proclaim you openly," Straff said. "Name you my heir.
Tomorrow, if you wish."
Zane didn't
respond. Straff continued to sweat.
"The city is
yours," Zane finally said, turning away.
He was rewarded
with a startled gasp from behind.
Zane glanced back.
He'd never seen such a look of shock on his father's face. That alone
was almost worth everything.
"Pull your men
back, as you are planning," Zane said, "but don't return to
the Northern Dominance. Wait for those koloss to invade the city, let
them take down the defenses and kill the defenders. Then, you can
sweep in and rescue Luthadel."
"But, Elend's
Mistborn . . . "
"Will be
gone," Zane said. "She's leaving with me, tonight.
Farewell, Father." He turned and left through the slit he'd
made.
"Zane?"
Straff called from inside the tent.
Zane paused again.
"Why?"
Straff asked, looking out through the slit. "I sent assassins to
kill you. Why are you letting me live?"
"Because
you're my father," Zane said. He turned away, looking into the
mists. "A man shouldn't kill his father."
With that, Zane bid
a final farewell to the man who had created him. A man whom
Zane—despite his insanity, despite the abuse he'd known over
the years—loved.
In the dark mists
he threw down a coin and shot out over the camp. Outside its
confines, he landed and easily located the bend in the canal he used
as a marker. From the hollow of a small tree there, he pulled a
bundle of cloth. A mistcloak, the first gift Straff had given him,
years before when Zane had first Snapped. To him, it was too precious
to wear around, to soil and use.
He knew himself a
fool. However, he could not help how he felt. One could not use
emotional Allomancy on one's self.
He unwrapped the
mistcloak and withdrew the things it protected—several vials of
metal and a pouch filled with beads. Atium.
He knelt there for
a long moment. Then, he reached up to his chest, feeling the space
just above his rib cages. Where his heart thumped.
There was a large
bump there. There always had been. He didn't think about it often;
his mind seemed to get distracted when he did. It, however, was the
real reason he never wore cloaks.
He didn't like the
way that cloaks rubbed against the small point of the spike that
stuck out of his back just between the shoulder blades. The head was
against his sternum, and couldn't be seen beneath clothing.
"It is time to
go," God said.
Zane stood, leaving
the mistcloak behind. He turned from his father's camp, leaving
behind that which he had known, instead seeking the woman who would
save him.
Alendi believes
as they do.





47
A PART OF VIN
WASN'T EVEN bothered by how many people she had killed. That very
indifference, however, terrified her.
She sat on her
balcony a short time after her visit to the palace, the city of
Luthadel lost in darkness before her. She sat in the mists—but
knew better, now, than to think she'd find solace in their swirling
patterns. Nothing was that simple anymore.
The mist spirit
watched her, as always. It was too distant to see, but she could feel
it. And, even stronger than the mist spirit, she could feel something
else. That powerful thumping, growing louder and louder. It had once
seemed distant, but no longer.
The Well of
Ascension.
That was what it
had to be. She could feel its power returning, flowing back
into the world, demanding to be taken up and used. She kept finding
herself glancing north, toward Terris, expecting to see something on
the horizon. A burst of light, a blazing fire, a tempest of winds.
Something. But there was just mist.
It seemed that she
couldn't succeed at anything, lately. Love, protection, duty. I've
let myself get stretched too thin, she thought.
There were so many
things that demanded her attention, and she'd tried to give heed to
them all. As a result, she had accomplished nothing. Her research
about the Deepness and the Hero of Ages lay untouched for days, still
arranged in piles scattered across her floor. She knew next to
nothing about the mist spirit—only that it watched her, and
that the logbook author had thought it dangerous. She hadn't dealt
with the spy in her crew; she didn't know if Zane's claims regarding
Demoux were true.
And Cett still
lived. She couldn't even perform a proper massacre without stumbling
halfway through. It was Kelsier's fault. He had trained her to take
his place, but could anyone ever really do that?
Why do we always
have to be someone else's knives? Zane's voice whispered in her
head.
His words had
seemed to make sense sometimes, but they had a flaw. Elend. Vin
wasn't his knife—not really. He didn't want her to assassinate
or kill. But, his ideals had left him without a throne, and had left
his city surrounded by enemies. If she really loved Elend—if
she really loved the people of Luthadel—wouldn't she have done
more?
The pulsings
thumped against her, like the beats of a drum the size of the sun.
She burned bronze almost constantly now, listening to the rhythm,
letting it pull her away . . . .
"Mistress?"
OreSeur asked from behind. "What are you thinking about?"
"The end,"
Vin said quietly, staring outward.
Silence.
"The end of
what, Mistress?"
"I don't
know."
OreSeur padded over
to the balcony, walking into the mists and sitting down beside her.
She was getting to know him well enough that she could see concern in
his canine eyes.
She sighed, shaking
her head. "I just have decisions to make. And, no matter which
choice I make, it will mean an end."
OreSeur sat for a
moment, head cocked. "Mistress," he finally said, "that
seems excessively dramatic to me."
Vin shrugged. "No
advice for me, then?"
"Just make the
decision," OreSeur said.
Vin sat for a
moment, then smiled. "Sazed would have said something wise and
comforting."
OreSeur frowned. "I
fail to see why he should be part of this conversation, Mistress."
"He was my
steward," Vin said. "Before he left, and before Kelsier
switched your Contract to me."
"Ah,"
OreSeur said. "Well, I never did much like Terrismen, Mistress.
Their self-important sense of subservience is very difficult to
imitate—not to mention the fact that their muscles are far too
stringy to taste good."
Vin raised an
eyebrow. "You've imitated Terrismen? I didn't think there would
be much cause for that—they weren't a very influential people
during the days of the Lord Ruler."
"Ah,"
OreSeur said. "But they were always around influential
people."
Vin nodded,
standing. She walked back into her empty room and lit a lamp,
extinguishing her tin. Mist carpeted the room, flowing over her
stacks of paper, her feet throwing up puffs as she walked toward the
bedroom.
She paused. That
was a bit strange. Mist rarely remained long when it came indoors.
Elend said it had to do with heat and enclosed spaces. Vin had always
ascribed to it something more mystical. She frowned, watching it.
Even without tin,
she heard the creak.
Vin spun. Zane
stood on the balcony, his figure a black silhouette in the mists. He
stepped forward, the mist following around him, as it did around
anyone burning metals. And yet . . . it also seemed to be pushing
away from him slightly.
OreSeur growled
quietly.
"It's time,"
Zane said.
"Time for
what?" Vin asked, setting the lamp down.
"To go,"
Zane said. "To leave these men and their armies. To leave the
squabbling. To be free."
Free.
"I . . . don't
know, Zane," Vin said, looking away.
She heard him step
forward. "What do you owe him, Vin? He doesn't know you. He
fears you. The truth is, he was never worthy of you."
"No," Vin
said, shaking her head. "That's not it at all, Zane. You don't
understand. I was never worthy of him. Elend deserves someone better.
He deserves . . . someone who shares his ideals. Someone who thinks
he was right to give up his throne. Someone who sees more honor—and
less foolishness—in that."
"Either way,"
Zane said, stopping a short distance from her. "He cannot
understand you. Us."
Vin didn't reply.
"Where would
you go, Vin?" Zane asked. "If you weren't bound to this
place, bound to him? If you were free, and could do whatever you
wished, where would you go?"
The thumpings
seemed louder. She glanced toward OreSeur, who sat quietly by the
side wall, mostly in the dark. Why feel guilty? What did she have to
prove to him?
She turned back to
Zane. "North," she said. "To Terris."
"We can go
there. Wherever you want. Location is irrelevant to me, as long as it
is not this place."
"I can't
abandon them," Vin said.
"Even if by
doing so, you steal away Straff's only Mistborn?" Zane asked.
"The trade is a good one. My father will know that I have
disappeared, but he will not realize that you aren't still in
Luthadel. He'll be even more afraid to attack. By giving yourself
freedom, you'll also be leaving your allies with a precious gift."
Zane took her hand,
forcing her to look at him. He did look like Elend—like a hard
version of Elend. Zane had been broken by life, just as she had been,
but both had put themselves back together. Had the re-forming made
them stronger, or more fragile?
"Come,"
Zane whispered. "You can save me, Vin."
A war is coming
to the city, Vin thought with a chill. If I stay, I will have
to kill again.
And slowly, she let
him draw her away from her desk, toward the mists and the comforting
darkness beyond. She reached up, pulling out a metal vial for the
journey, and the motion caused Zane to spin suspiciously.
He has good
instincts, Vin thought. Instincts like my own. Instincts that
won't let him trust, but that keep him alive.
He relaxed as he
saw what she was doing, and smiled and turned away again. Vin
followed him, walking again, but she felt a sudden stab of fear. This
is it, she thought. After this, everything changes. The time
for decisions has passed.
And I made the
wrong choice.
Elend wouldn't
have jumped like that when I took out the vial.
She froze. Zane
tugged on her wrist, but she didn't move. He turned toward her in the
mists, frowning as he stood at the edge of her balcony.
"I'm sorry,"
Vin whispered, slipping her hand free. "I can't go with you."
"What?"
Zane asked. "Why not?"
Vin shook her head,
turning and walking back into the room.
"Tell me what
it is!" Zane said, tone rising. "What is it about him that
draws you? He isn't a great leader. He's not a warrior. He's no
Allomancer or general. What is it about him?"
The answer came to
her simply and easily. Make your decisions—I'll support you
in them. "He trusts me," she whispered.
"What?"
Zane asked incredulously.
"When I
attacked Cett," Vin said, "the others thought I was acting
irrationally—and they were right. But Elend told them I had a
good reason, even if he didn't know what it was."
"So he's a
fool," Zane said.
"When we spoke
later," Vin continued, not looking at Zane, "I was cold to
him. I think he knew that I was trying to decide whether to stay with
him or not. And . . . he told me that he trusted my judgment. He'd
support me if I chose to leave him."
"So he's also
unappreciative," Zane said.
Vin shook her head.
"No. He just loves me."
"I love you."
Vin paused, looking
at Zane. He looked angry. Desperate, even. "I believe you. I
still can't go with you."
"But why?"
"Because it
would require leaving Elend," she said. "Even if I can't
share his ideals, I can respect them. Even if I don't deserve him, I
can be near him. I'm staying, Zane."
Zane stood quietly
for a moment, mist falling around his shoulders. "I've failed,
then."
Vin turned away
from him. "No. It isn't that you've failed. You aren't flawed
simply because I—"
He slammed into
her, throwing her toward the mist-covered floor. Vin turned her head,
shocked, as she crashed into the wooden floor, the breath going out
of her.
Zane loomed above
her, his face dark. "You were supposed to save me," he
hissed.
Vin flared every
metal she had in a sudden jolt. She shoved Zane backward and Pulled
herself against the door hinges. She flew backward and hit the door
hard, the wood cracking slightly, but she was too tense—too
shocked—to feel anything but the thud.
Zane rose quietly,
standing tall, dark. Vin rolled forward into a crouch. Zane was
attacking her. Attacking her for real.
But . . . he . .
.
"OreSeur!"
Vin said, ignoring her mind's objections, whipping out her daggers.
"Run away!"
The code given, she
charged, trying to distract Zane's attention from the wolfhound. Zane
sidestepped her attacks with a casual grace. Vin whipped a dagger
toward his neck. It barely missed as Zane tipped his head backward.
She struck at his side, at his arm, at his chest. Each strike missed.
She'd known he'd
burn atium. She'd expected that. She skidded to a stop, looking at
him. He hadn't even bothered to pull out his own weapons. He stood
before her, face dark, mist a growing lake at his feet. "Why
didn't you listen to me, Vin?" he asked. "Why force me to
keep being Straff's tool? We both know where that must lead."
Vin ignored him.
Gritting her teeth, she launched into an attack. Zane backhanded her
indifferently, and she Pushed slightly against the deskmounts behind
him—tossing herself backward, as if thrown by the force of his
blow. She slammed into the wall, then slumped to the ground.
Directly beside the
startled OreSeur.
He hadn't opened
his shoulder to give her the atium. Hadn't he understood the code?
"The atium I gave you," Vin hissed. "I need it. Now."
"Kandra,"
Zane said. "Come to me."
OreSeur met her
eyes, and she saw something within them. Shame. He glanced away, then
padded across the floor, mist up to his knees, as he joined Zane in
the center of the room.
"No . . . "
Vin whispered. "OreSeur—"
"You will no
longer obey her commands, TenSoon," Zane said.
OreSeur bowed his
head.
"The Contract,
OreSeur!" Vin said, climbing to her knees. "You must
obey my orders!"
"My servant,
Vin," Zane said. "My Contract. My orders."
My servant . . .
.
And suddenly, it
clicked. She'd suspected everyone—Dockson, Breeze, even
Elend—but she'd never connected the spy to the one person that
made the most sense. There had been a kandra in the palace all
along. And he had been at her side.
"I'm sorry,
Mistress," OreSeur whispered.
"How long?"
Vin asked, bowing her head.
"Since you
gave my predecessor—the real OreSeur—the dog's body,"
the kandra said. "I killed him that day and took his place,
wearing the body of a dog. You never saw him as a wolfhound."
What easier way
to mask the transformation? Vin thought. "But, the bones we
discovered in the palace," she said. "You were with me on
the wall when they appeared. They—"
She'd taken his
word on how fresh those bones had been; she'd taken his word on when
they had been produced. She'd assumed all along that the switch must
have happened that day, when she was with Elend on the city wall—but
she'd done so primarily because of what OreSeur had said.
Idiot! she
thought. OreSeur—or, TenSoon, as Zane had called him—had
led her to suspect everyone but himself. What was wrong with her? She
was usually so good at sniffing out traitors, at noticing
insincerity. How had she missed spotting her own kandra?
Zane walked
forward. Vin waited, on her knees. Weak, she told herself.
Look weak. Make him leave you alone. Try to—
"Soothing me
will do no good," Zane said quietly, grabbing her by the front
of her shirt, picking her up, then throwing her back down. Mist
sprayed beneath her, puffing up in a splash as she slammed to the
floor. Vin stifled her cry of pain.
I have to stay
quiet. If guards come, he'll kill them. If Elend comes . . .
She had to stay
quiet, quiet even as Zane kicked her in her wounded side. She
grunted, eyes watering.
"You could
have saved me," Zane said, peering down at her. "I was
willing to go with you. Now, what is left? Nothing. Nothing, but
Straff's orders." He punctuated that sentence with a kick.
Stay small,
she told herself through the pain. He'll leave you alone
eventually . . . .
But it had been
years since she'd had to bow before anyone. Her days of cringing
before Camon and Reen were almost misty shadows, forgotten before the
light offered by Elend and Kelsier. As Zane kicked again, Vin found
herself growing angry.
He brought his foot
back, angling it toward her face, and Vin moved. As his foot arced
down, she threw herself backward, Pushing against the window latches
to scoot herself through the mists. She flared pewter, throwing
herself up to her feet, trailing mist from the floor. It was up past
her knees now.
She glared at Zane,
who looked back with a dark expression. Vin ducked forward, but Zane
moved faster—moved first—stepping between her and
the balcony. Not that getting to it would do her any good; with
atium, he could chase her down easily.
It was like before,
when he'd attacked her with atium. Only this time it was worse.
Before, she'd been able to believe—if just a little—that
they were still sparring. Still not enemies, even if they weren't
friends. She hadn't really believed that he wanted to kill her.
She had no such
illusions this time. Zane's eyes were dark, his expression flat—just
like that night a few days before, when slaughtering Cett's men.
Vin was going to
die.
She hadn't felt
such fear in a long time. But now she saw it, felt it, smelled it on
herself as she shied away from the approaching Zane. She felt what it
was like to face a Mistborn—what it must have been like for
those soldiers she'd killed. There was no fighting. There was no
chance.
No, she told
herself forcefully, holding her side. Elend didn't back down
against Straff. He doesn't have Allomancy, but he marched into the
center of the koloss camp.
I can beat this.
With a cry, Vin
dashed toward TenSoon. The dog backed away in shock, but he needn't
have worried. Zane was there again. He slammed a shoulder into Vin,
then whipped his dagger around and slashed a wound across her cheek
as she fell backward. The cut was precise. Perfect. Matching the
wound on her other cheek, one given to her during her first fight
with a Mistborn, nearly two years before.
Vin gritted her
teeth, burning iron as she fell. She Pulled on a pouch on her desk,
whipping the coins into her hand. She hit the ground on her side,
other hand down, and threw herself back to her feet. She dumped a
shower of coins from the pouch into her hand, then raised them at
Zane.
Blood dripped from
her chin. She threw the coins out. Zane moved to Push them away.
Vin smiled, then
burned duralumin as she Pushed. The coins snapped forward, and the
wind of their sudden passing parted the mist on the ground, revealing
the floor beneath.
The room shook.
And in an eyeblink,
Vin found herself slammed back against the wall. She gasped in
surprise, breath knocked from her lungs, her vision swimming. She
looked up, disoriented, surprised to find herself on the ground
again.
"Duralumin,"
Zane said, still standing with a hand up before him. "TenSoon
told me about it. We deduced you must have a new metal from the way
you can sense me when my copper is on. After that, a little
searching, and he found that note from your metallurgist, which
handily had the instructions for making duralumin."
Her addled mind
struggled to connect ideas. Zane had duralumin. He'd used the metal,
and had Pushed against one of the coins she'd shot at him. He must
have Pushed behind himself as well, to keep from being forced
backward as his weight met hers.
And her own
duralumin-enhanced Push had slammed her against the wall. She had
trouble thinking. Zane walked forward. She looked up, dazed, then
scrambled away on hands and knees, crawling in the mists. It was at
face level, and her nostrils tickled as she inhaled the cool, quiet
chaos.
Atium. She needed
atium. But, the bead was in TenSoon's shoulder, she couldn't Pull it
to herself. The reason he carried it there was that the flesh
protected it from being affected by Allomancers. Just like the spikes
piercing an Inquisitor's body, just like her own earring. Metal
inside—or even piercing—a person's body could not be
Pulled or Pushed except with the most extreme of Allomantic forces.
But she'd done it
once. When fighting the Lord Ruler. It hadn't been her own power, or
even duralumin, that had let her accomplish it. It had been something
else. The mists.
She'd drawn upon
them.
Something hit her
on her back, pushing her down. She rolled over, kicking upward, but
her foot missed Zane's face by a few atium-aided inches. Zane slapped
her foot aside, then reached down, slamming her against the floor by
her shoulders.
Mists churned
around him as he looked down at her. Through her terror, she reached
out for the mists, as she had over a year before when fighting the
Lord Ruler. That day, they had fueled her Allomancy, giving her a
strength that she shouldn't have had. She reached out for them,
begging for their help.
And nothing
happened.
Please . . . .
Zane slammed her
down again. The mists continued to ignore her pleas.
She twisted,
Pulling against the window frame to get leverage, and pushed Zane to
the side. They rolled, Vin coming around on top.
Suddenly, both of
them lurched off the floor, bursting out of the mists and flying
toward the ceiling, thrown upward as Zane Pushed against coins on the
floor. They slammed against the ceiling, Zane's body pushing against
hers, pinning her to the wooden planks. He was on top again—or,
rather, he was on the bottom, but that was now the point of leverage.
Vin gasped. He was
so strong. Stronger than she. His fingers bit into the flesh of her
arms despite her pewter, and her side ached from her earlier wounds.
She was in no condition to fight—not against another Mistborn.
Especially not one
with atium.
Zane continued to
Push them against the ceiling. Vin's hair fell toward him, and mists
churned the floor below, like a whirlpool vortex that was slowly
rising.
Zane released his
Push, and they fell. Yet, he was still in control. He spun her,
throwing her down below him as they entered the mists again. They hit
the ground, the blow knocking the wind from Vin's lungs yet again.
Zane loomed above her, speaking through gritted teeth.
"All that
effort, wasted," he hissed. "Hiding an Allomancer in Cett's
hirelings so that you would suspect him of attacking you at the
Assembly. Forcing you to fight in front of Elend so that he'd be
intimidated by you. Pushing you to explore your powers and kill so
that you'd realize just how powerful you truly are. All wasted!"
He leaned down.
"You. Were. Supposed. To. Save me!" he said, his
face just inches from hers, breathing heavily. He pinned one of her
struggling arms to the floor with his knee, and then, in a strangely
surreal moment, he kissed her.
And at the same
time, he rammed his dagger into the side of one of her breasts. Vin
tried to cry out, but his mouth held hers as the dagger cut her
flesh.
"Be careful,
Master!" OreSeur—TenSoon—suddenly yelled. "She
knows much about kandra!"
Zane looked up, his
hand stilled. The voice, the pain, brought lucidity to Vin. She
flared tin, using the pain to shock herself awake, clearing her mind.
"What?"
Zane asked, looking down toward the kandra.
"She knows,
Master," TenSoon said. "She knows our secret. The reason
why we served the Lord Ruler. The reason why we serve the Contract.
She knows why we fear Allomancers so much."
"Be silent,"
Zane commanded. "And speak no more."
TenSoon fell
silent.
Our secret . . .
Vin thought, glancing over at the wolfhound, sensing the anxiety
in his canine expression. He's trying to tell me something. Trying
to help me.
Secret. The secret
of the kandra. The last time she'd tried Soothing him, he'd howled
with pain. Yet, she saw permission in his expression. It was enough.
She slammed TenSoon
with a Soothing. He cried out, howling, but she Pushed harder.
Nothing happened. Gritting her teeth, she burned duralumin.
Something broke.
She was in two places at once. She could feel TenSoon standing by the
wall, and she could feel her own body in Zane's grip. TenSoon was
hers, totally and completely. Somehow, not quite knowing how, she
ordered him forward, controlling his body.
The massive
wolfhound's body slammed into Zane, throwing him off Vin. The dagger
flipped to the ground, and Vin stumbled to her knees, grabbing her
chest, feeling warm blood there. Zane rolled, obviously shocked, but
he came to his feet and kicked TenSoon.
Bones broke. The
wolfhound tumbled across the floor—right toward Vin. She
snatched the dagger off the ground as he rolled to her feet, then
plunged it into his shoulder, cutting the shoulder, her fingers
feeling in the muscle and sinew. She came up with bloodied hands and
a single bead of atium. She swallowed it with a gulp, spinning toward
Zane.
"Now let's see
how you fare," she hissed, burning atium. Dozens of atium
shadows burst from Zane, showing her possible actions he could
take—all of them ambiguous. She would be giving off the same
confusing mess to his eyes. They were even.
Zane turned,
looking into her eyes, and his atium shadows disappeared.
Impossible!
she thought. TenSoon groaned at her feet as she realized that her
atium reserve was gone. Burned away. But the bead had been so large .
. . .
"Did you think
I'd give you the very weapon you needed to fight me?" Zane asked
quietly. "Did you think I'd really give up atium?"
"But—"
"A lump of
lead," Zane said, walking forward. "Plated with a thin
layer of atium around it. Oh, Vin. You really need to be more careful
whom you trust."
Vin stumbled
backward, feeling her confidence wilt. Make him talk! she
thought. Try to get his atium to run out.
"My brother
said that I shouldn't trust anyone . . . " she mumbled. "He
said . . . anyone would betray me."
"He was a wise
man," Zane said quietly, standing chest-deep in mists.
"He was a
paranoid fool," Vin said. "He kept me alive, but he left me
broken."
"Then he did
you a favor."
Vin glanced toward
TenSoon's mangled, bleeding form. He was in pain; she could see it in
his eyes. In the distance she could hear . . . thumping. She'd turned
her bronze back on. She looked up slowly. Zane was walking toward
her. Confident.
"You've been
playing with me," she said. "You drove a wedge between me
and Elend. You made me think he feared me, made me think he was using
me."
"He was,"
Zane said.
"Yes,"
Vin said. "But it doesn't matter—not the way you made it
seem. Elend uses me. Kelsier used me. We use each other, for love,
for support, for trust."
"Trust will
kill you," he said.
"Then it is
better to die."
"I trusted
you," he said, stopping before her. "And you betrayed me."
"No," Vin
said, raising her dagger. "I'm going to save you. Just like you
want." She snapped forward and struck, but her hope—that
he'd run out of atium—was in vain. He sidestepped
indifferently; he let her dagger come within an inch of striking, but
he was never really in danger.
Vin spun to attack,
but her blade cut only air, skimming along the top of the rising
mists.
Zane moved before
her next attack came, dodging even before she knew what she was going
to do. Her dagger stabbed the place where he had been standing.
He's too fast,
she thought, side burning, mind thumping. Or was that the Well of
Ascension thumping . . . .
Zane stopped just
in front of her.
I can't hit him,
she thought with frustration. Not when he knows where I'll strike
before I do!
Vin paused.
Before I do . .
. .
Zane stepped away
to a place near the center of the room, then kicked her fallen dagger
into the air and caught it. He turned back toward her, mist trailing
from the weapon in his hand, jaw set and eyes dark.
He knows where
I'll strike before I do.
Vin raised her
dagger, blood trickling down face and side, thunderous drumbeats
booming in her mind. The mist was nearly up to her chin.
She cleared her
mind. She didn't plan an attack. She didn't react to Zane as he ran
toward her, dagger raised. She loosened her muscles and closed her
eyes, listening to his footsteps. She felt the mist rise around her,
churned by Zane's advent.
She snapped her
eyes open. He had the dagger raised; it glittered as it swung. Vin
prepared to attack, but didn't think about the strike; she simply let
her body react.
And she watched
Zane very, very carefully.
He flinched just
slightly to the left, open hand moving upward, as if to grab
something.
There! Vin
thought, immediately wrenching herself to the side, forcing her
instinctive attack out of its natural trajectory. She twisted her
arm—and dagger—midswing. She had been about to attack
left, as Zane's atium had anticipated.
But, by reacting,
Zane had shown her what she was going to do. Let her see the future.
And if she could see it, she could change it.
They met. Zane's
weapon took her in the shoulder. But Vin's knife took him in the
neck. His left hand closed on empty air, snatching at a shadow that
should have told him where her arm would be.
Zane tried to gasp,
but her knife had pierced his windpipe. Air sucked through blood
around the blade, and Zane stumbled back, eyes wide with shock. He
met her eyes, then collapsed into the mists, his body thumping
against the wooden floor.
Zane looked up
through the mists, looked up at her. I'm dying, he thought.
Her atium shadow
had split at the last moment. Two shadows, two possibilities.
He'd counteracted the wrong one. She'd tricked him, defeated him
somehow. And now he was dying.
Finally.
"You know why
I thought you'd save me?" he tried to whisper to her, though he
somehow knew that his lips weren't properly forming the words. "The
voice. You were the first person I ever met that it didn't tell me to
kill. The only person."
"Of course I
didn't tell you to kill her," God said.
Zane felt his life
seeping away.
"You know the
really funny thing, Zane?" God asked. "The most amusing
part of this all? You're not insane.
"You never
were."
Vin watched quietly
as Zane sputtered, blood coming from his lips. She watched
cautiously; a knife to the throat should have been enough to kill
even a Mistborn, but sometimes pewter could let one do awesome
things.
Zane died. She
checked his pulse, then retrieved her dagger. After that, she stood
for a moment, feeling . . . numb, in both mind and body. She raised a
hand to her wounded shoulder—and in doing so, she brushed her
wounded breast. She was bleeding too much, and her mind was growing
fuzzy again.
I killed him.
She flared pewter,
forcing herself to keep moving. She stumbled over to TenSoon,
kneeling beside him.
"Mistress,"
he said. "I'm sorry . . . ."
"I know,"
she said, staring at the terrible wound she'd made. His legs no
longer worked, and his body lay in an unnatural twist. "How can
I help?"
"Help?"
TenSoon said. "Mistress, I nearly got you killed!"
"I know,"
she said again. "How can I make the pain go away? Do you need
another body?"
TenSoon was quiet
for a moment. "Yes."
"Take Zane's,"
Vin said. "For the moment, at least."
"He is dead?"
TenSoon asked with surprise.
He couldn't see,
she realized. His neck is broken.
"Yes,"
she whispered.
"How,
Mistress?" TenSoon asked. "He ran out of atium?"
"No," Vin
said.
"Then, how?"
"Atium has a
weakness," she said. "It lets you see the future."
"That . . .
doesn't sound like a weakness, Mistress."
Vin sighed,
wobbling slightly. Focus! she thought. "When you burn
atium, you see a few moments into the future—and you can change
what will happen in that future. You can grab an arrow that should
have kept flying. You can dodge a blow that should have killed you.
And you can move to block an attack before it even happens."
TenSoon was quiet,
obviously confused.
"He showed me
what I was going to do," Vin said. "I couldn't
change the future, but Zane could. By reacting to my attack before I
even knew what I was going to do, he inadvertently showed me the
future. I reacted against him, and he tried to block a blow that
never came. That let me kill him."
"Mistress . .
. " TenSoon whispered. "That is brilliant."
"I'm sure I'm
not the first to think of it," Vin said wearily. "But it
isn't the sort of secret that you share. Anyway, take his body."
"I . . . would
rather not wear the bones of that creature," TenSoon said. "You
don't know how broken he was, Mistress."
Vin nodded tiredly.
"I could just find you another dog body, if you want."
"That won't be
necessary, Mistress," TenSoon said quietly. "I still have
the bones of the other wolfhound you gave me, and most of them are
still good. If I replace a few of them with the good bones from this
body, I should be able to form a complete skeleton to use."
"Do it, then.
We're going to need to plan what to do next."
TenSoon was quiet
for a moment. Finally, he spoke. "Mistress, my Contract is void,
now that my master is dead. I . . . need to return to my people for
reassignment."
"Ah," Vin
said, feeling a wrench of sadness. "Of course."
"I do not want
to go," TenSoon said. "But, I must at least report to my
people. Please, forgive me."
"There is
nothing to forgive," Vin said. "And thank you for that
timely hint at the end."
TenSoon lay
quietly. She could see guilt in his canine eyes. He shouldn't have
helped me against his current master.
"Mistress,"
TenSoon said. "You know our secret now. Mistborn can control a
kandra's body with Allomancy. I don't know what you will do with
it—but realize that I have entrusted you with a secret that my
people have kept sacred for a thousand years. The way that
Allomancers could take control of our bodies and make slaves of us."
"I . . . don't
even understand what happened."
"Perhaps it is
better that way," TenSoon said. "Please, leave me. I have
the other dog's bones in the closet. When you return, I will be
gone."
Vin rose, nodding.
She left, then, pushing through the mists and seeking the hallway
outside. Her wounds needed tending. She knew that she should go to
Sazed, but somehow she couldn't force herself in that direction. She
walked faster, feet taking her down the hallway, until she was
running.
Everything was
collapsing around her. She couldn't manage it all, couldn't keep
things straight. But she did know what she wanted.
And so she ran to
him.
He is a good
man—despite it all, he is a good man. A sacrificing man. In
truth, all of his actions—all of the deaths, destructions, and
pains that he has caused—have hurt him deeply. All of these
things were, in truth, a kind of sacrifice for him.





48
ELEND YAWNED,
LOOKING OVER THE letter he'd penned to Jastes. Perhaps he could
persuade his former friend to see reason.
If he couldn't . .
. well, a duplicate of the wooden coin Jastes had been using to "pay"
the koloss sat on Elend's desk. It was a perfect copy, whittled by
Clubs himself. Elend was pretty certain that he had access to more
wood than Jastes did. If he could help Penrod stall for a few more
weeks, they might be able to make enough "money" to bribe
the koloss away.
He set down his
pen, rubbing his eyes. It was late. Time to—
His door slammed
open. Elend spun, and caught sight of a flustered Vin dashing across
the room and into his arms. She was crying.
And she was bloody.
"Vin!" he
said. "What happened?"
"I killed
him," she said, head buried in Elend's chest.
"Who?"
"Your
brother," she said. "Zane. Straff's Mistborn. I killed
him."
"Wait. What?
My brother?"
Vin nodded. "I'm
sorry."
"Forget about
that, Vin!" Elend said, gently prying her back and pushing her
into his chair. She had a gash on her cheek, and her shirt was slick
with blood. "Lord Ruler! I'm going to get Sazed right now."
"Don't leave
me," she said, holding his arm.
Elend paused.
Something had changed. She seemed to need him again. "Come with
me, then. We'll both go see him."
Vin nodded,
standing. She teetered just a bit, and Elend felt a spike of fear,
but the determined look in her eyes wasn't something he wanted to
challenge. He put his arm around her, letting her lean on him as they
walked to Sazed's quarters. Elend paused to knock, but Vin simply
pushed her way into the dark room, then wobbled and sat down on the
floor just inside.
"I'll . . .
sit here," she said.
Elend paused
worriedly by her side, then raised his lamp and called toward the
bedchamber. "Sazed!"
The Terrisman
appeared a moment later, looking exhausted and wearing a white
sleeping robe. He noticed Vin, blinked a few times, then disappeared
into his chambers. He returned a moment later with a metalmind bracer
strapped to his forearm and a bag of medical equipment.
"Now, Lady
Vin," Sazed said, setting the bag down. "What would Master
Kelsier think, seeing you in this condition? You ruin more clothing
in this manner, I think . . . ."
"This isn't a
time for levity, Sazed," Elend said.
"I apologize,
Your Majesty," Sazed said, carefully cutting the clothing away
from Vin's shoulder. "However, if she is still conscious, then
she isn't in serious danger." He peered closer at the wound,
absently lifting clean cloths from his bag.
"You see?"
Sazed asked. "This gash is deep, but the blade was deflected by
the bone, and missed hitting any major vessels. Hold this here."
He pressed a cloth to the wound, and Elend put his hand on it. Vin
sat with her eyes closed, resting back against the wall, blood
dripping slowly from her chin. She seemed more exhausted than in
pain.
Sazed took his
knife and cut away the front of Vin's shirt, exposing her wounded
chest.
Elend paused.
"Perhaps I should . . . "
"Stay,"
Vin said. It wasn't a plea, but a command. She raised her head,
opening her eyes as Sazed tisked quietly at the wound, then got out a
numbing agent and some needle and thread.
"Elend,"
she said, "I need to tell you something."
He paused. "All
right."
"I've realized
something about Kelsier," she said quietly. "I always focus
on the wrong things, when it comes to him. It's hard to forget the
hours he spent training me to be an Allomancer. Yet, it wasn't his
ability to fight that made him great—it wasn't his harshness or
his brutality, or even his strength or his instincts."
Elend frowned.
"Do you know
what it was?" she asked.
He shook his head,
still pressing the cloth against her shoulder.
"It was his
ability to trust," she said. "It was the way that he made
good people into better people, the way that he inspired them.
His crew worked because he had confidence in them—because he
respected them. And, in return, they respected each other. Men like
Breeze and Clubs became heroes because Kelsier had faith in them."
She looked up at
him, blinking tired eyes. "And you are far better at that than
Kelsier ever was, Elend. He had to work at it. You do it
instinctively, treating even weasels like Philen as if they were good
and honorable men. It's not naivete, as some think. It's what Kelsier
had, only greater. He could have learned from you."
"You give me
too much credit," he said.
She shook a tired
head. Then she turned to Sazed.
"Sazed?"
she asked.
"Yes, child?"
"Do you know
any wedding ceremonies?"
Elend nearly
dropped the cloth in shock.
"I know
several," Sazed said as he tended the wound. "Some two
hundred, actually."
"Which one is
the shortest?" Vin asked.
Sazed pulled a
stitch tight. "The people of Larsta only required a profession
of love before a local priest. Simplicity was a tenet of their belief
structure—a reaction, perhaps, to the traditions of the land
they were banished from, which was known for its complex system of
bureaucratic rules. It is a good religion, one that focused on simple
beauty found in nature."
Vin looked at
Elend. Her face was bloody, her hair a mess.
"Now, see,"
he said. "Vin, don't you think that maybe this should wait
until, you know—"
"Elend?"
she interrupted. "I love you."
He froze.
"Do you love
me?" she asked.
This is insane.
"Yes," he said quietly.
Vin turned to
Sazed, who was still working. "Well?"
Sazed looked up,
fingers bloodied. "This is a very strange time for such an
event, I think."
Elend nodded in
agreement.
"It's just a
little bit of blood," Vin said tiredly. "I'm really all
right, now that I've sat down."
"Yes,"
Sazed said, "but you seem somewhat distraught, Lady Vin. This
isn't a decision to be made lightly, under the influence of strong
emotions."
Vin smiled. "The
decision to get married shouldn't be made because of strong
emotions?"
Sazed floundered.
"That isn't exactly what I meant. I'm simply not certain that
you are fully in control of your faculties, Lady Vin."
Vin shook her head.
"I'm more in control than I have been for months. It's time for
me to stop hesitating, Sazed—time to stop worrying, time to
accept my place in this crew. I know what I want, now. I love Elend.
I don't know what kind of time we'll have together, but I want some,
at least."
Sazed sat for a
moment, then returned to his sewing. "And you, Lord Elend? What
are your thoughts?"
What were
his thoughts? He remembered just the day before, when Vin had spoken
of leaving, and the wrenching he had felt. He thought of how much he
depended on her wisdom, and her bluntness, and her simple—but
not simplistic—devotion to him. Yes, he did love her.
The world had gone
chaotic recently. He had made mistakes. Yet, despite everything that
had happened, and despite his frustrations, he still felt strongly
that he wanted to be with Vin. It wasn't the idyllic infatuation he'd
felt a year and a half ago, at the parties. But it felt more solid.
"Yes, Sazed,"
he said. "I do want to marry her. I have wanted it for some
time. I . . . I don't know what's going to happen to the city, or my
kingdom, but I want to be with Vin when it comes."
Sazed continued to
work. "Very well, then," he finally said. "If it is my
witness you require, then you have it."
Elend knelt, still
pressing the cloth on Vin's shoulder, feeling a little bit stunned.
"That's it then?"
Sazed nodded. "It
is as valid as any witness the obligators could give you, I think. Be
warned, the Larsta love oath is binding. They knew no form of divorce
in their culture. Do you accept my witness of this event?"
Vin nodded. Elend
felt himself doing the same.
"Then you are
married," Sazed said, tying off his thread, then draping a cloth
across Vin's chest. "Hold this for a bit, Lady Vin, and stanch
the rest of the bleeding." Then he moved on to her cheek.
"I feel like
there should be a ceremony or something," Elend said.
"I could give
one, if you wish," Sazed said, "but I do not think you need
one. I have known you both for some time, and am willing to give my
blessing to this union. I simply offer counsel. Those who take
lightly promises they make to those they love are people who find
little lasting satisfaction in life. This is not an easy time in
which to live. That does not mean that it has to be a difficult time
to love, but it does mean that you will find unusual stresses upon
your lives and your relationship.
"Do not forget
the love oath you made to each other this evening. It will give you
much strength in the days to come, I think." With that, he
pulled the last stitch tight on Vin's face, then finally moved to the
shoulder. The bleeding there had mostly stopped, and Sazed studied
the wound for a moment before beginning work on it.
Vin looked up at
Elend, smiling, looking a bit drowsy. He stood and walked over to the
room's washbasin, and returned with a damp cloth to wipe off her face
and cheek.
"I'm sorry,"
she said quietly as Sazed moved around and took the place Elend had
been kneeling in.
"Sorry?"
Elend said. "About my father's Mistborn?"
Vin shook her head.
"No. For taking so long."
Elend smiled.
"You're worth the wait. Besides, I think I had to figure a few
things out as well."
"Like how to
be a king?"
"And how to
stop being one."
Vin shook her head.
"You never stopped being one, Elend. They can take your crown,
but they can't take your honor."
Elend smiled.
"Thank you. However, I don't know how much good I've done the
city. By even being here, I divided the people, and now Straff will
end up in control."
"I'll kill
Straff if he puts one foot in this city."
Elend gritted his
teeth. Back to the same problems again. They could only hold
Vin's knife against his neck for so long. He'd figure out a way to
wiggle around, and there was always Jastes and those koloss . . . .
"Your
Majesty." Sazed said as he worked, "perhaps I can offer a
solution."
Elend glanced down
at the Terrisman, raising an eyebrow.
"The Well of
Ascension," Sazed said.
Vin opened her eyes
immediately.
"Tindwyl and I
have been researching the Hero of Ages," Sazed continued. "We
are convinced that Rashek never did what the Hero was supposed to. In
fact, we aren't even convinced that this Alendi of a thousand years
ago was the Hero. There are too many discrepancies, too many
problems and contradictions. In addition, the mists—the
Deepness—are still here. And now they are killing people."
Elend frowned.
"What are you saying?"
Sazed pulled a
stitch tight. "Something still needs to be done, Your Majesty.
Something important. Looking at it from a smaller perspective, it
might seem that the events at Luthadel and the rise of the Well of
Ascension are unrelated. However, from a larger view, they may be
solutions to one another."
Elend smiled. "Like
the lock and the key."
"Yes, Your
Majesty," Sazed said, smiling. "Precisely like that."
"It thumps,"
Vin whispered, eyes closing. "In my head. I can feel it."
Sazed paused, then
wrapped a bandage around Vin's arm. "Can you feel where it is?"
Vin shook her head.
"I . . . There doesn't seem to be a direction to the pulses. I
thought they were distant, but they're getting louder."
"That must be
the Well returning to power," Sazed said. "It is fortunate
that I know where to find it."
Elend turned, and
Vin opened her eyes again.
"My research
has revealed the location, Lady Vin," Sazed said. "I can
draw you a map, from my metalminds."
"Where?"
Vin whispered.
"North,"
Sazed said. "In the mountains of Terris. Atop one of the lower
peaks, known as Deryatith. Travel there will be difficult this time
of year . . . ."
"I can do it,"
Vin said firmly as Sazed turned to working on her chest wound. Elend
flushed again, then paused as he turned away.
I'm . . .
married. "You're going to leave?" Elend asked, looking
to Vin. "Now?"
"I have to,"
Vin whispered. "I have to go to it, Elend."
"You should go
with her, Your Majesty," Sazed said.
"What?"
Sazed sighed,
looking up. "We have to face facts, Your Majesty. As you said
earlier, Straff will soon take this city. If you are here, you will
be executed. However, Lady Vin will undoubtedly need help securing
the Well."
"It's supposed
to hold great power," Elend said, rubbing his chin. "Could
we, you think, destroy those armies?"
Vin shook her head.
"We couldn't use it," she whispered. "The power is a
temptation. That's what went wrong last time. Rashek took the power
instead of giving it up."
"Giving it
up?" Elend asked. "What does that mean?"
"Letting it
go, Your Majesty," Sazed said. "Letting it defeat
the Deepness on its own."
"Trust,"
Vin whispered. "It's about trust."
"However,"
Sazed said, "I think that releasing this power could do great
things for the land. Change things, and undo much of the damage the
Lord Ruler did. I have a strong suspicion that it would destroy the
koloss, since they were created by the Lord Ruler's misuse of the
power."
"But Straff
would hold the city," Elend said.
"Yes,"
Sazed said, "but if you leave, the transition will be peaceful.
The Assembly has all but decided to accept him as their emperor, and
it appears that he'll let Penrod rule as a subject king. There will
be no bloodshed, and you will be able to organize resistance from
outside. Besides, who knows what releasing the power will do? Lady
Vin could be left changed, much as the Lord Ruler was. With the crew
in hiding within the city, it should not be so difficult to oust your
father—particularly when he grows complacent in a year or so."
Elend gritted his
teeth. Another revolution. Yet, what Sazed said made sense.
For so long, we've been worrying about the small-scale. He
glanced at Vin, feeling a surge of warmth and love. Maybe it's
time I started listening to the things she's been trying to tell me.
"Sazed,"
Elend said, a sudden thought occurring to him, "do you think
that I could convince the Terris people to help us?"
"Perhaps, Your
Majesty," Sazed said. "My prohibition against
interfering—the one I have been ignoring—comes because I
was given a different assignment by the Synod, not because we believe
in avoiding all action. If you could convince the Synod that the
future of the Terris people will be benefited by having a strong ally
in Luthadel, you may just be able to get yourself military aid from
Terris."
Elend nodded,
thoughtful.
"Remember the
lock and the key, Your Majesty," Sazed said, finishing off Vin's
second wound. "In this case, leaving seems like the opposite of
what you should do. However, if you look at the larger picture, you
will see that it's precisely what you need to do."
Vin opened her
eyes, looking up at him, smiling. "We can do this, Elend. Come
with me."
Elend stood for a
moment. Lock and key . . . . "All right," he said.
"We'll leave as soon as Vin is able."
"She should be
able to ride tomorrow," Sazed said. "You know what pewter
can do for a body."
Elend nodded. "All
right. I should have listened to you earlier, Vin. Besides, I've
always wanted to see your homeland, Sazed. You can show it to us."
"I will need
to stay here, I fear," Sazed said. "I should soon leave for
the South to continue my work there. Tindwyl, however, can go with
you—she has important information that needs to be passed on to
my brethren the Keepers."
"It will need
to be a small group," Vin said. "We'll have to outrun—or
perhaps sneak past—Straff's men."
"Just you
three, I think," Sazed said. "Or, perhaps one other person
to help with watches while you sleep, someone skilled in hunting and
scouting. Lord Lestibournes, perhaps?"
"Spook would
be perfect," Elend said, nodding. "You're sure the other
crewmembers will be safe in the city?"
"Of course
they won't," Vin said, smiling. "But they're experts. They
hid from the Lord Ruler—they'll be able to hide from Straff.
Particularly if they don't have to worry about keeping you safe."
"Then it is
decided," Sazed said, standing. "You two should try to rest
well tonight, despite the recent change in your relationship. Can you
walk, Lady Vin?"
"No need,"
Elend said, leaning down and picking her up. She wrapped her arms
around him, though her grip was not tight, and he could see that her
eyes were already drooping again.
He smiled.
Suddenly, the world seemed a much simpler place. He would take some
time and spend it on what was really important; then, once he and Vin
had sought help from the North, they could return. He actually looked
forward to coming back and tackling their problems with renewed
vigor.
He held Vin tight,
nodding good night to Sazed, then walking out toward his rooms. It
seemed that everything had worked out fine in the end.
Sazed stood slowly,
watching the two leave. He wondered what they would think of him,
when they heard of Luthadel's fall. At least they would have each
other for support.
His wedding
blessing was the last gift he could give them—that, and their
lives. How will history judge me for my lies? he wondered.
What will it think of the Terrisman who took such a hand in
politics, the Terrisman who would fabricate mythology to save the
lives of his friends? The things he'd said about the Well were,
of course, falsehoods. If there was such a power, he had no idea
where it was, nor what it would do.
How history judged
him would probably depend on what Elend and Vin did with their lives.
Sazed could only hope that he had done the right thing. Watching them
go, knowing that their youthful love would be spared, he couldn't
help but smile at his decision.
With a sigh, he
stooped down and gathered up his medical items; then he retreated to
his rooms to fabricate the map he had promised Vin and Elend.





PART FIVE
SNOW AND ASH
He is accustomed
to giving up his own will before the greater good, as he sees it.





49
"YOU ARE A
FOOL, ELEND Venture," Tindwyl snapped, arms folded, eyes wide
with displeasure.
Elend pulled a
strap tight on his saddle. Part of the wardrobe Tindwyl had made for
him included a black and silver riding uniform, and he wore this now,
fingers snug within the leather gloves, and a dark cloak to keep off
the ash.
"Are you
listening to me?" Tindwyl demanded. "You can't leave. Not
now! Not when your people are in such danger!"
"I'll protect
them in another way," he said, checking on the packhorses.
They were in the
keep's covered way, used for arrivals and departures. Vin sat on her
own horse, enveloped almost completely in her cloak, hands holding
her reins tensely. She had very little experience riding, but Elend
refused to let her run. Pewter or no pewter, the wounds from her
fight at the Assembly still hadn't healed completely, not to mention
the damage she'd taken the night before.
"Another way?"
Tindwyl asked. "You should be with them. You're their king!"
"No, I'm not,"
Elend snapped, turning toward the Terriswoman. "They rejected
me, Tindwyl. Now I have to worry about more important events on a
larger stage. They wanted a traditional king? Well, let them have my
father. When I return from Terris, perhaps they will have realized
what they lost."
Tindwyl shook her
head and stepped forward, speaking in a quiet voice. "Terris,
Elend? You go north. For her. You know why she wants to go there,
don't you?"
He paused.
"Ah, so you do
know," Tindwyl said. "What do you think of it, Elend? Don't
tell me you believe these delusions. She thinks she's the Hero of
Ages. She supposes that she'll find something in the mountains up
there—some power, or perhaps some revelation, that will
transform her into a divinity."
Elend glanced at
Vin. She looked down at the ground, hood down, still sitting quietly
on her horse.
"She's trying
to follow her master, Elend," Tindwyl whispered. "The
Survivor became a god to these people, so she thinks she has to do
the same."
Elend turned to
Tindwyl. "If that is what she truly believes, then I support
her."
"You support
her madness?" Tindwyl demanded.
"Do not speak
of my wife in that manner," Elend said, his commanding tone
causing Tindwyl to flinch. He swung up into his saddle. "I trust
her, Tindwyl. Part of trust is belief."
Tindwyl snorted.
"You can't possibly believe that she is some prophesied messiah,
Elend. I know you—you're a scholar. You may have professed
allegiance to the Church of the Survivor, but you don't believe in
the supernatural any more than I do."
"I believe,"
he said firmly, "that Vin is my wife, and that I love her.
Anything important to her is important to me—and anything she
believes has at least that much weight of truth to me. We are going
north. We will return once we've released the power there."
"Fine,"
Tindwyl said. "Then you will be remembered as a coward who
abandoned his people."
"Leave us!"
Elend ordered, raising his finger and pointing toward the keep.
Tindwyl spun,
stalking toward the doorway. As she passed it, she pointed at the
supply table, where she had previously placed a book-sized package,
wrapped in brown paper, tied with a thick string. "Sazed wishes
you to deliver this to the Keeper Synod. You'll find them in the city
of Tathingdwen. Enjoy your exile, Elend Venture." Then, she
left.
Elend sighed,
moving his horse over beside Vin's.
"Thank you,"
she said quietly.
"For what?"
"For what you
said."
"I meant it,
Vin," Elend said, reaching over to lay a hand on her shoulder.
"Tindwyl might
be right, you know," she said. "Despite what Sazed said, I
could be mad. Do you remember when I told you that I'd seen a spirit
in the mists?"
Elend nodded
slowly.
"Well, I've
seen it again," Vin said. "It's like a ghost, formed from
the patterns in mist. I see it all the time, watching me, following
me. And I hear those rhythms in my head—majestic, powerful
thumpings, like Allomantic pulses. Only, I don't need bronze anymore
to hear them."
Elend squeezed her
shoulder. "I believe you, Vin."
She looked up,
reserved. "Do you, Elend? Do you really?"
"I'm not
sure," he admitted. "But I'm trying very hard to. Either
way, I think going north is the right thing to do."
She nodded slowly.
"That's enough, I think."
He smiled, turning
back to the doorway. "Where is Spook?"
Vin shrugged
beneath her cloak. "I assume Tindwyl won't be coming with us,
then."
"Probably
not," Elend said, smiling.
"How will we
find our way to Terris?"
"It won't be
hard," Elend said. "We'll just follow the imperial canal to
Tathingdwen." He paused, thinking of the map Sazed had given
them. It led straight into the Terris Mountains. They'd have to get
supplies in Tathingdwen, and the snows would be high, but . . . well,
that was a problem for another time.
Vin smiled, and
Elend walked over to pick up the package Tindwyl had left. It
appeared to be a book of some sort. A few moments later, Spook
arrived. He wore his soldier's uniform, and had saddlebags slung over
his shoulder. He nodded to Elend, handed Vin a large bag, then moved
to his own horse.
He looks
nervous, Elend thought as the boy slung his bags over his horse.
"What's in the bag?" he asked, turning to Vin.
"Pewter dust,"
she said. "I think we might need it."
"Are we
ready?" Spook asked, looking over at them.
Elend glanced at
Vin, who nodded. "I guess we—"
"Not quite
yet," a new voice said. "I'm not ready at all."
Elend turned as
Allrianne swept into the passage. She wore a rich brown and red
riding skirt, and had her hair tied up beneath a scarf. Where'd
she get that outfit? Elend wondered. Two servants followed her,
bearing bundles.
Allrianne paused,
tapping her lip with a thoughtful expression. "I think I'm going
to need a packhorse."
"What are you
doing?" Vin demanded.
"Going with
you," Allrianne said. "Breezy says I have to leave the
city. He's a very silly man, sometimes, but he can be quite stubborn.
He spent the entire conversation Soothing me—as if I couldn't
recognize his touch by now!"
Allrianne waved to
one of the servants, who ran to get a stablehand.
"We're going
to be riding very hard," Elend said. "I'm not sure if
you'll be able to keep up."
Allrianne rolled
her eyes. "I rode all the way out here from the Western
Dominance! I think I can manage. Besides, Vin is hurt, so you
probably won't be going that fast."
"We don't want
you along," Vin said. "We don't trust you—and we
don't like you."
Elend closed his
eyes. Dear, blunt Vin.
Allrianne just
twittered a laugh as the servant returned with two horses, then began
to load one. "Silly Vin," she said. "How can you say
that after all we've shared?"
"Shared?"
Vin asked. "Allrianne, we went shopping together one time."
"And I felt we
bonded quite well," Allrianne said. "Why, we're practically
sisters!"
Vin gave the girl a
flat stare.
"Yes,"
Allrianne said, "and you're definitely the older, boring
sister." She smiled sweetly, then swung easily up into her
saddle, suggesting considerable horsemanship. One of the servants led
her packhorse over, then tied the reins into place behind Allrianne's
saddle.
"All right,
Elend dear," she said. "I'm ready. Let's go."
Elend glanced at
Vin, who shook her head with a dark look.
"You can leave
me behind if you wish," Allrianne said, "but I'll just
follow and get into trouble, and then you'll have to come save me.
And don't even try and pretend that you wouldn't!"
Elend sighed. "Very
well," he said. "Let's go."
They made their way
slowly through the city, Elend and Vin at the lead, Spook bringing
their packhorses, Allrianne riding to the side. Elend kept his head
up, but that only let him see the faces that poked out of windows and
doorways as he passed. Soon, a small crowd was trailing them—and
while he couldn't hear their whispers, he could imagine what they
were saying.
The king. The
king is abandoning us . . . .
He knew that many
of them still couldn't understand that Lord Penrod held the throne.
Elend glanced away from an alleyway, where he saw many eyes watching
him. There was a haunted fear in those eyes. He had expected to see
accusations, but somehow their despondent acceptance was even more
disheartening. They expected him to flee. They expected to be
abandoned. He was one of the few rich enough, and powerful enough, to
get away. Of course he'd run.
He squeezed his own
eyes shut, trying to force down his guilt. He wished that they could
have left at night, sneaking out the passwall as Ham's family had.
However, it was important that Straff saw Elend and Vin leaving, so
that he understood he could take the city without attacking.
I'll be back,
Elend promised the people. I'll save you. For now, it's better if
I leave.
The broad doors of
Tin Gate appeared ahead of them. Elend kicked his horse forward,
speeding ahead of his silent wave of followers. The guards at the
gate already had their orders. Elend gave them a nod, reining in his
horse, and the men swung the doors open. Vin and the others joined
him before the opening portal.
"Lady Heir,"
one of the guards asked quietly. "Are you leaving, too?"
Vin looked to the
side. "Peace," she said. "We're not abandoning you.
We're going for help."
The soldier smiled.
How can he trust
her so easily? Elend thought. Or, is hope all he has left?
Vin turned her
horse around, facing the crowd of people, and she lowered her hood.
"We will return," she promised. She didn't seem as nervous
as she had before when dealing with people who revered her.
Ever since last
night, something has changed in her, Elend thought.
As a group, the
soldiers saluted them. Elend saluted back; then he nodded to Vin. He
led the way as they galloped out the gates, angling toward the
northern highway—a path that would allow them to skirt just
west of Straff's army.
They hadn't gone
far before a group of horsemen moved to intercept them. Elend rode
low on his horse, sparing a glance for Spook and the packhorses. What
caught Elend's attention, however, was Allrianne: she rode with
amazing proficiency, a look of determination on her face. She didn't
seem the least bit nervous.
To the side, Vin
whipped her cloak back, bringing out a handful of coins. She flung
them into the air, and they shot forward with a speed Elend had never
seen, even from other Allomancers. Lord Ruler! he thought with
shock as the coins zipped away, disappearing faster than he could
track.
Soldiers fell, and
Elend barely heard the plinging of metal against metal over
the sound of wind and hoofbeats. He rode directly through the center
of the chaotic group of men, many of them down and dying.
Arrows began to
fall, but Vin scattered these without even waving a hand. She had
opened the bag of pewter, he noticed, and was releasing the dust in a
shower behind her as she rode, Pushing some of it to the sides.
The next arrows
won't have metal heads, Elend thought nervously. Soldiers were
forming up behind, shouting.
"I'll catch
up," Vin said, then jumped off her horse.
"Vin!"
Elend yelled, turning his beast. Allrianne and Spook shot past him,
riding hard. Vin landed and, amazingly, didn't even stumble as she
began to run. She downed a vial of metal, then looked toward the
archers.
Arrows flew. Elend
cursed, but kicked his horse into motion. There was little he could
do now. He rode low, galloping as the arrows fell around him. One
passed within inches of his head, falling to stick into the road.
And then they
stopped falling. He glanced backward, teeth gritted. Vin stood before
a rising cloud of dust. The pewter dust, he thought. She's
Pushing on it—Pushing the flakes along the ground, stirring up
the dust and ash.
A massive wave of
dust, metal, and ash slammed into the archers, washing over them. It
blew around the soldiers, making them curse and shield their eyes,
and some fell to the ground, holding their faces.
Vin swung back onto
her horse, then galloped away from the billowing mass of wind-borne
particles. Elend slowed his horse, letting her catch up. The army was
in chaos behind them, men giving orders, people scattering.
"Speed up!"
Vin said as she approached. "We're almost out of bowshot!"
Soon they joined
Allrianne and Spook. We aren't out of danger—my father could
still decide to send pursuit.
But, the soldiers
couldn't have mistaken Vin. If Elend's instincts were right, Straff
would let them run. His prime target was Luthadel. He could go after
Elend later; for now, he would simply be happy to see Vin leaving.
"Thank you
kindly for the help getting out," Allrianne suddenly said,
watching the army. "I'll be going now."
With that, she
veered her two horses away, angling toward a group of low hills to
the west.
"What?"
Elend asked with surprise, pulling up next to Spook.
"Leave her,"
Vin said. "We don't have time."
Well, that
solves one problem, Elend thought, turning his horse to the
northern highway. Farewell, Luthadel. I'll be back for you later.
"Well, that
solves one problem," Breeze noted, standing atop the city wall
and watching Elend's group disappear around a hillside. To the east,
a large—and still unexplained—pillar of smoke rose from
the koloss camp. To the west, Straff's army was buzzing about,
stirred by the escape.
At first, Breeze
had worried about Allrianne's safety—but then he'd realized
that, enemy army notwithstanding, there was no safer place for her
than beside Vin. As long as Allrianne didn't get too far away from
the others, she would be safe.
It was a quiet
group that stood atop the wall with him, and for once, Breeze barely
touched their emotions. Their solemnity seemed appropriate. The young
Captain Demoux stood beside the aging Clubs, and the peaceful Sazed
stood with Ham the warrior. Together, they watched the seed of hope
they'd cast to the winds.
"Wait,"
Breeze said, frowning as he noticed something. "Wasn't Tindwyl
supposed to be with them?"
Sazed shook his
head. "She decided to Stay."
"Why would she
do that?" Breeze asked. "Didn't I hear her babbling
something about not interfering in local disputes?"
Sazed shook his
head. "I do not know, Lord Breeze. She is a difficult woman to
read."
"They all
are," Clubs muttered.
Sazed smiled.
"Either way, it appears our friends have escaped."
"May the
Survivor protect them," Demoux said quietly.
"Yes,"
Sazed said. "May he indeed."
Clubs snorted.
Resting one arm on the battlements, he turned to eye Sazed with a
gnarled face. "Don't encourage him."
Demoux flushed,
then turned and walked away.
"What was that
about?" Breeze asked curiously.
"The boy has
been preaching to my soldiers," Clubs said. "Told him I
didn't want his nonsense cluttering their minds."
"It is not
nonsense, Lord Cladent," Sazed said, "it's faith."
"Do you
honestly think," Clubs said, "that Kelsier is going
to protect these people?"
Sazed wavered.
"They believe it, and that is—"
"No,"
Clubs interrupted, scowling. "That isn't enough,
Terrisman. These people fool themselves by believing in the
Survivor."
"You believed
in him," Sazed said. Breeze was tempted to Soothe him, make the
argument less tense, but Sazed already seemed completely calm. "You
followed him. You believed in the Survivor enough to overthrow the
Final Empire."
Clubs scowled. "I
don't like your ethics, Terrisman—I never have. Our
crew—Kelsier's crew—fought to free this people because it
was right."
"Because you
believed it to be right," Sazed said.
"And what do
you believe to be right, Terrisman?"
"That
depends," Sazed said. "There are many different systems
with many different worthy values."
Clubs nodded, then
turned, as if the argument were over.
"Wait, Clubs,"
Ham said. "Aren't you going to respond to that?"
"He said
enough," Clubs said. "His belief is situational. To him,
even the Lord Ruler was a deity because people worshipped him—or
were forced to worship him. Aren't I right, Terrisman?"
"In a way,
Lord Cladent," Sazed said. "Though, the Lord Ruler might
have been something of an exception."
"But you still
keep records and memories of the Steel Ministry's practices, don't
you?" Ham asked.
"Yes,"
Sazed admitted.
"Situational,"
Clubs spat. "At least that fool Demoux had the sense to choose
one thing to believe in."
"Do not deride
someone's faith simply because you do not share it, Lord Cladent,"
Sazed said quietly.
Clubs snorted
again. "It's all very easy for you, isn't it?" he asked.
"Believing everything, never having to choose?"
"I would say,"
Sazed replied, "that it is more difficult to believe as I do,
for one must learn to be inclusionary and accepting."
Clubs waved a
dismissive hand, turning to hobble toward the stairs. "Suit
yourself. I have to go prepare my boys to die."
Sazed watched him
go, frowning. Breeze gave him a Soothing—taking away his
self-consciousness—for good measure.
"Don't mind
him, Saze," Ham said. "We're all a little on edge, lately."
Sazed nodded.
"Still, he makes good points—ones I have never before had
to face. Until this year, my duty was to collect, study, and
remember. It is still very hard for me to consider setting one belief
beneath another, even if that belief is based on a man that I know to
have been quite mortal."
Ham shrugged. "Who
knows? Maybe Kell is out there somewhere, watching over us."
No, Breeze
thought. If he were, we wouldn't have ended up here—waiting
to die, locked in a city we were supposed to save.
"Anyway,"
Ham said, "I still want to know where that smoke is coming
from."
Breeze glanced at
the koloss camp. The dark pillar was too centralized to be coming
from cooking fires. "The tents?"
Ham shook his head.
"El said there were only a couple of tents—far too few to
make that much smoke. That fire has been burning for some time."
Breeze shook his
head. Doesn't really matter now, I guess.
Straff Venture
coughed again, curling over in his chair. His arms were slick with
sweat, his hands trembling.
He wasn't getting
better.
At first, he'd
assumed that the chills were a side effect of his nervousness. He'd
had a hard evening, sending assassins after Zane, then somehow
escaping death at the insane Mistborn's hands. Yet, during the night,
Straff's shakes hadn't gotten better. They'd grown worse. They
weren't just from nervousness; he must have a disease of some sort.
"Your
Majesty!" a voice called from outside.
Straff straightened
himself, trying to look as presentable as possible. Even so, the
messenger paused as he entered the tent, apparently noting Straff's
wan skin and tired eyes.
"My . . .
lord," the messenger said.
"Speak, man,"
Straff said curtly, trying to project a regality he didn't feel. "Out
with it."
"Riders, my
lord," the man said. "They left the city!"
"What!"
Straff said, throwing off his blanket and standing. He managed to
stand upright despite a bout of dizziness. "Why wasn't I
informed?"
"They passed
quickly, my lord," the messenger said. "We barely had time
to send the interception crew."
"You caught
them, I assume," Straff said, steadying himself on his chair.
"Actually,
they escaped, my lord," the messenger said slowly.
"What?"
Straff said, spinning in rage. The motion was too much. The dizziness
returned, blackness creeping across his field of vision. He stumbled,
catching himself on the chair, managing to collapse into it rather
than onto the floor.
"Send for the
healer!" he heard the messenger shout. "The king is sick!"
No, Straff
thought groggily. No, this came too quickly. It can't be a
disease.
Zane's last words.
What had they been? A man shouldn't kill his father . . . .
Liar.
"Amaranta,"
Straff croaked.
"My lord?"
a voice asked. Good. Someone was with him.
"Amaranta,"
he said again. "Send for her."
"Your
mistress, my lord?"
Straff forced
himself to remain conscious. As he sat, his vision and balance
returned somewhat. One of his door guards was at his side. What was
the man's name? Grent.
"Grent,"
Straff said, trying to sound commanding. "You must bring
Amaranta to me. Now!"
The soldier
hesitated, then rushed from the room. Straff focused on his
breathing. In and out. In and out. Zane was a snake. In and out. In
and out. Zane hadn't wanted to use the knife—no, that was
expected. In and out. But when had the poison come? Straff had been
feeling ill the entire day before.
"My lord?"
Amaranta stood at
the doorway. She had been beautiful once, before age had gotten to
her—as it got to all of them. Childbirth destroyed a woman. So
succulent she had been, with her firm breasts and smooth, unblemished
skin . . . .
Your mind is
wandering, Straff told himself. Focus.
"I need . . .
antidote," Straff forced out, focusing on the Amaranta of the
now: the woman in her late twenties, the old—yet still
useful—thing that kept him alive in the face of Zane's poisons.
"Of course, my
lord," Amaranta said, walking over to his poison cabinet,
getting out the necessary ingredients.
Straff settled
back, focusing on his breathing. Amaranta must have sensed his
urgency, for she hadn't even tried to get him to bed her. He watched
her work, getting out her burner and ingredients. He needed . . . to
find . . . Zane . . . .
She wasn't doing it
the right way.
Straff burned tin.
The sudden flash of sensitivity nearly blinded him, even in the shade
of his tent, and his aches and shivers became sharp and excruciating.
But his mind cleared, as if he'd suddenly bathed in frigid water.
Amaranta was
preparing the wrong ingredients. Straff didn't know a great deal
about the making of antidotes. He'd been forced to delegate this
duty, instead focusing his efforts on learning to recognize the
details—the scents, the tastes, the discolorations—of
poisons. Yet, he had watched Amaranta prepare her catch-all antidote
on numerous occasions. And she was doing it differently this time.
He forced himself
out of his chair, keeping tin flared, though it caused his eyes to
water. "What are you doing?" he said, walking on unsteady
feet toward her.
Amaranta looked up,
shocked. The guilt that flashed in her eyes was enough confirmation.
"What are you
doing!" Straff bellowed, fear giving him strength as he grabbed
her by the shoulders, shaking her. He was weakened, but he was still
much stronger than she.
The woman looked
down. "Your antidote, my lord . . . "
"You're making
it the wrong way!" Straff said.
"I thought,
you looked fatigued, so I might add something to help you stay
awake."
Straff paused. The
words seemed logical, though he was having trouble thinking. Then,
looking down at the chagrined woman, he noticed something. His eyes
enhanced beyond natural detail, he caught a slight glimpse of a bit
of uncovered flesh beneath her bodice.
He reached down and
ripped off the side of her dress, exposing her skin. Her left
breast—disgusting to him, for it sagged a slight bit—was
scarred and cut, as if by a knife. None of the scars were fresh, but
even in his addled state, Straff recognized Zane's handiwork.
"You're his
lover?" Straff said.
"It's your
fault," Amaranta hissed. "You abandoned me, once I aged and
bore you a few children. Everyone told me you would, but yet, I hoped
. . . "
Straff felt himself
growing weak. Dizzy, he rested a hand on the wooden poisons cabinet.
"Yet,"
Amaranta said, tears on her cheeks. "Why did you have to take
Zane from me, too? What did you do, to draw him off? To make him stop
coming to me?"
"You let him
poison me," Straff said, falling to one knee.
"Fool,"
Amaranta spat. "He never poisoned you—not a single time.
Though, at my request, he often made you think that he had. And then,
each time, you ran to me. You suspected everything Zane did—and
yet, you never once paused to think what was in the 'antidote' I gave
you."
"It made me
better," Straff mumbled.
"That's what
happens when you're addicted to a drug, Straff," Amaranta
whispered. "When you get it, you feel better. When you don't get
it . . . you die."
Straff closed his
eyes.
"You're mine
now, Straff," she said. "I can make you—"
Straff bellowed,
gathering what strength he had and throwing himself at the woman. She
cried in surprise as he tackled her, pushing her to the ground.
Then she said
nothing, for Straff's hands choked her windpipe. She struggled for a
bit, but Straff weighed far more than she did. He'd intended to
demand the antidote, to force her to save him, but he wasn't thinking
clearly. His vision began to fuzz, his mind dim.
By the time he
regained his wits, Amaranta was blue and dead on the ground before
him. He wasn't certain how long he'd been strangling her corpse. He
rolled off her, toward the open cabinet. On his knees, he reached up
for the burner, but his shaking hands toppled it to the side,
spilling hot liquid across the floor.
Cursing to himself,
he grabbed a flagon of unheated water and began to throw handfuls of
herbs into it. He stayed away from the drawers that held the poisons,
sticking to those that held antidotes. Yet, there were many
crossovers. Some things were poisonous in large doses, but could cure
in smaller amounts. Most were addictive. He didn't have time to worry
about that; he could feel the weakness in his limbs, and he could
barely grab the handfuls of herbs. Bits of brown and red shook from
his fingers as he dumped handful after handful into the mixture.
One of these was
the herb that she'd gotten him addicted to. Any one of the others
might kill him. He wasn't even sure what the odds were.
He drank the
concoction anyway, gulping it down between choking gasps for air,
then let himself slip into unconsciousness.
I have no doubt
that if Alendi reaches the Well of Ascension, he will take the power
and then—in the name of the presumed greater good—give it
up.





50
"ARE THOSE THE
FELLOWS YOU want, Lady Cett?"
Allrianne scanned
the valley—and the army it contained—then looked down at
the bandit, Hobart. He smiled eagerly—or, well, he kind
of smiled. Hobart had fewer teeth than he had fingers, and he was
missing a couple of those.
Allrianne smiled
back from atop her horse. She sat sidesaddle, reins held lightly in
her fingers. "Yes, I do believe that it is, Master Hobart."
Hobart looked back
at his band of thugs, grinning. Allrianne Rioted them all a bit,
reminding them how much they wanted her promised reward. Her father's
army spread out before them in the distance. She had wandered for an
entire day, traveling west, looking for it. But, she'd been heading
in the wrong direction. If she hadn't run afoul of Hobart's helpful
little gang, she would have been forced to sleep outside.
And that would have
been rather unpleasant.
"Come, Master
Hobart," she said, moving her horse forward. "Let's go and
meet with my father."
The group followed
happily, one of them leading her packhorse. There was a certain charm
to simple men, like Hobart's crew. They really only wanted three
things: money, food, and sex. And they could usually use the first to
get the other two. When she'd first run across this group, she'd
blessed her fortune—despite the fact that they had been running
down a hillside in ambush, intent on robbing and raping her. Another
charm about men like these was that they were rather inexperienced
with Allomancy.
She kept a firm
hold on their emotions as they rode down toward the camp. She didn't
want them reaching any disappointing conclusions—such as
"Ransoms are usually bigger than rewards." She couldn't
control them completely, of course—she could only influence
them. However, with men so base, it was fairly easy to read what was
going on in their heads. It was amusing how quickly a little promise
of wealth could turn brutes into near gentlemen.
Of course, there
wasn't much of a challenge in dealing with men like Hobart, either.
No . . . no challenge, as there had been with Breezy. Now, that
had been fun. And rewarding, too. She doubted she'd ever find a man
as aware of his emotions, and as aware of the emotions of others, as
Breezy. Getting a man like him—a man so expert in Allomancy, so
determined that his age made him inappropriate for her—to love
her . . . well, that had been a true accomplishment.
Ah, Breezy,
she thought as they passed out of the forest and onto the hillside
before the army. Do any of your friends even understand what a
noble man you are?
They really didn't
treat him well enough. Of course, that was to be expected. That was
what Breezy wanted. People who underestimated you were easier to
manipulate. Yes, Allrianne understood this concept quite well—for
there were few things more quickly dismissed than a young, silly
girl.
"Halt!" a
soldier said, riding up with an honor guard. They had swords drawn.
"Step away from her, you!"
Oh, honestly,
Allrianne thought, rolling her eyes. She Rioted the group of
soldiers, enhancing their sense of calmness. She didn't want any
accidents.
"Please,
Captain," she said as Hobart and his crew drew weapons, huddling
around her uncertainly. "These men have rescued me from the
savage wilderness and brought me safely home, at much personal cost
and danger."
Hobart nodded
firmly, an action undermined just a bit as he wiped his nose on his
sleeve. The soldier captain looked over the ash-stained,
motley-clothed group of bandits, then frowned.
"See that
these men have a good meal, Captain," she said airily, kicking
her horse forward. "And give them space for the night. Hobart,
I'll send your reward once I meet with my father."
Bandits and
soldiers moved in behind her, and Allrianne made sure to Riot them
both, enhancing their senses of trust. It was a tough sell for the
soldiers, especially as the wind shifted, blowing the full stench of
the bandit crew across them. Still, they all reached the camp without
incident.
The groups parted,
Allrianne giving her horses to an aide and calling for a page to warn
her father that she'd returned. She dusted off her riding dress, then
strode through camp, smiling pleasantly and looking forward to a bath
and the other comforts—such as they were—that the army
could provide. However, first there were things she needed to attend
to.
Her father liked to
spend evenings in his open-sided planning pavilion, and he sat there
now, arguing with a messenger. He looked over as Allrianne swished
into the pavilion, smiling sweetly at Lords Galivan and Detor, her
father's generals.
Cett sat on a
high-legged chair so he could get a good view of his table and its
maps. "Well, damn it," he said. "You are back."
Allrianne smiled,
wandering around his planning table, looking at the map. It detailed
the supply lines back to the Western Dominance. What she saw was not
good.
"Rebellions
back home, Father?" she asked.
"And ruffians
attacking my supply carts," Cett said. "That boy Venture
bribed them, I'm sure of it."
"Yes, he did,"
Allrianne said. "But, that's all pointless now. Did you miss
me?" She made sure to Tug strongly on his sense of devotion.
Cett snorted,
pulling at his beard. "Fool of a girl," he said. "I
should have left you home."
"So I could
have fallen to your enemies when they raised a rebellion?" she
asked. "We both know that Lord Yomen was going to move the
moment you pulled your armies out of the dominance."
"And I should
have let that damn obligator have you!"
Allrianne gasped.
"Father! Yomen would have held me for ransom. You know how
terribly I wilt when I'm locked up."
Cett glanced at
her, and then—apparently despite himself—he started to
chuckle. "You'd've had him feeding you gourmet foods before the
day was through. Maybe I should have left you behind. Then, at
least, I'd have known where you were—rather than worrying where
you'd run off to next. You didn't bring that idiot Breeze back with
you, did you?"
"Father!"
Allrianne said. "Breezy is a good man."
"Good men die
quickly in this world, Allrianne," Cett said. "I know—I've
killed enough of them."
"Oh, yes,"
Allrianne said, "you're very wise. And taking an aggressive
stance against Luthadel had such a positive outcome, didn't
it? Chased away with your tail between your legs? You'd be dead now,
if dear Vin had as little conscience as you."
"That
'conscience' didn't stop her from killing some three hundred of my
men," Cett said.
"She's a very
confused young lady," Allrianne said. "Either way, I do
feel obliged to remind you that I was right. You should have made an
alliance with the Venture boy, instead of threatening him. That means
you owe me five new dresses!"
Cett rubbed his
forehead. "This isn't a damn game, girl."
"Fashion,
Father, is no game," Allrianne said firmly. "I can't
very well enchant bandit troops into leading me safely home if I look
like a street rat, now can I?"
"More bandits,
Allrianne?" Cett asked with a sigh. "You know how long it
took us to get rid of the last group?"
"Hobart's a
wonderful man," Allrianne said testily. "Not to mention
well-connected with the local thieving community. Give him some gold
and some prostitutes, and you might just be able to talk him into
helping you with those brigands that are attacking your supply
lines."
Cett paused,
glancing at the map. Then he began to pull at his beard thoughtfully.
"Well, you're back," he finally said. "Guess we'll
have to take care of you. I suppose you want someone to carry a
litter for you as we head home . . . ."
"Actually,"
Allrianne said, "we're not going back to the dominance. We're
returning to Luthadel."
Cett didn't
immediately dismiss the comment; he could usually tell when she was
being serious. Instead, he simply shook his head. "Luthadel
holds nothing for us, Allrianne."
"We can't go
back to the dominance, either," Allrianne said. "Our
enemies are too strong, and some of them have Allomancers. That's why
we had to come here in the first place. We can't leave the area until
we have either money or allies."
"There's no
money in Luthadel," Cett said. "I believe Venture when he
says the atium isn't there."
"I agree,"
Allrianne said. "I searched that palace well, never found a bit
of the stuff. That means we need to leave here with friends, instead
of money. Go back, wait for a battle to start, then help whichever
side looks like it's going to win. They'll feel indebted to us—they
might even decide to let us live."
Cett stood quietly
for a moment. "That's not going to help save your friend Breeze,
Allrianne. His faction is by far the weakest—even teaming with
the Venture boy, I doubt we could beat Straff or those koloss. Not
without access to the city walls and plenty of time to prepare. If we
go back, it will be to help your Breeze's enemies."
Allrianne shrugged.
You can't help him if you're not there, Father, she thought.
They're going to lose anyway—if you are in the area, then
there's a chance you'll end up helping Luthadel.
A very small
chance, Breeze. That's the best I can give you. I'm sorry.
Elend Venture awoke
on their third day out of Luthadel, surprised at how rested he could
feel after a night spent in a tent out in the wilderness. Of course,
part of that might have been the company.
Vin lay curled up
beside him in their bedroll, her head resting against his chest. He
would have expected her to be a light sleeper, considering how jumpy
she was, but she seemed to feel comfortable sleeping beside him. She
even seemed to become just a little less anxious when he put his arms
around her.
He looked down at
her fondly, admiring the form of her face, the slight curl of her
black hair. The cut on her cheek was almost invisible now, and she'd
already pulled out the stitches. A constant, low burn of pewter gave
the body remarkable strength for recovery. She didn't even favor her
right arm anymore—despite the cut shoulder—and her
weakness from the fight seemed completely gone.
She still hadn't
given him much of an explanation regarding that night. She had fought
Zane—who had apparently been Elend's half brother—and
TenSoon the kandra had left. Yet, neither of those things seemed like
they could have caused the distress in her he'd sensed when she'd
come to him in his rooms.
He didn't know if
he'd ever get the answers he wanted. Yet, he was coming to realize
that he could love her even if he didn't completely understand her.
He bent down and kissed the top of her head.
She immediately
tensed, eyes opening. She sat up, exposing a bare torso, then glanced
around their small tent. It was dimly lit with the light of dawn.
Finally, she shook her head, looking over at him. "You're a bad
influence on me."
"Oh?" he
asked, smiling as he rested on one arm.
Vin nodded, running
a hand through her hair. "You're making me get used to sleeping
at night," she said. "Plus, I don't sleep in my clothing
anymore."
"If you did,
it would make things a little awkward."
"Yes,"
she said, "but what if we get attacked during the night? I'd
have to fight them naked."
"I wouldn't
mind watching that."
She gave him a flat
stare, then reached for a shirt.
"You're having
a bad influence on me, too, you know," he said as he watched her
dress.
She raised an
eyebrow.
"You're making
me relax," he said. "And letting me stop worrying. I've
been so tied up with things in the city lately that I'd forgotten
what it was like to be an impolite recluse. Unfortunately, during our
trip, I've had time to read not only one, but all three
volumes of Troubeld's Arts of Scholarship."
Vin snorted,
kneeling in the low tent as she pulled her belt tight; then she
crawled over to him. "I don't know how you read while riding,"
she said.
"Oh, it's
quite easy—if you aren't afraid of horses."
"I'm not
afraid of them," Vin said. "They just don't like me. They
know I can outrun them, and that makes them surly."
"Oh, is that
it?" Elend asked, smiling, pulling her over to straddle him.
She nodded, then
leaned down to kiss him. She ended it after a moment, however, moving
to stand. She swatted his hand away as he tried to pull her back
down.
"After all the
trouble I took to get dressed?" she asked. "Besides. I'm
hungry."
He sighed,
reclining back as she scampered out of the tent, into the red morning
sunlight. He lay for a moment, quietly remarking to himself on his
fortune. He still wasn't sure how their relationship had worked out,
or even why it made him so happy, but he was more than willing to
enjoy the experience.
Eventually, he
looked over at his clothing. He had brought only one of his nice
uniforms—along with the riding uniform—and he didn't want
to wear either too often. He didn't have servants anymore to wash the
ash out of his clothing; in fact, despite the tent's double flap,
some ash had managed to work its way inside during the night. Now
that they were out of the city, there were no workers to sweep the
ash away, and it was getting everywhere.
So, he dressed in
an outfit far more simple: a pair of riding trousers, not unlike the
pants that Vin often wore, with a buttoning gray shirt and a dark
jacket. He'd never been forced to ride long distances
before—carriages were generally preferred—but Vin and he
were taking the trip relatively slowly. They had no real urgency.
Straff's scouts hadn't followed them for long, and nobody was
expecting them at their destination. They had time to ride leisurely,
taking breaks, occasionally walking so that they wouldn't get too
sore from riding.
Outside, he found
Vin stirring up the morning fire and Spook caring for the horses. The
young man had done some extensive traveling, and he knew how to tend
horses—something that Elend was embarrassed to have never
learned.
Elend joined Vin at
the firepit. They sat for a few moments, Vin poking at the coals. She
looked pensive.
"What?"
Elend asked.
She glanced
southward. "I . . . " Then she shook her head. "It's
nothing. We're going to need more wood." She glanced to the
side, toward where their axe lay beside the tent. The weapon flipped
up into the air, shooting toward her blade-first. She stepped to the
side, snatching the handle as it passed between her and Elend. Then
she stalked over to a fallen tree. She took two swings at it, then
easily kicked it down and broke it in two.
"She has a way
of making the rest of us feel a little redundant, doesn't she?"
Spook asked, stepping up beside Elend.
"At times,"
Elend said with a smile.
Spook shook his
head. "Whatever I see or hear, she can sense better—and
she can fight whatever it is that she finds. Every time I come back
to Luthadel, I just feel . . . useless."
"Imagine being
a regular person," Elend said. "At least you're an
Allomancer."
"Maybe,"
Spook said, the sound of Vin chopping coming from the side. "But
people respect you, El. They just dismiss me."
"I don't
dismiss you, Spook."
"Oh?" the
young man asked. "When's the last time I did anything important
for the crew?"
"Three days
ago," Elend said. "When you agreed to come with Vin and me.
You're not just here to tend horses, Spook—you're here because
of your skills as a scout and a Tineye. Do you still think we're
being followed?"
Spook paused, then
shrugged. "I can't be sure. I think Straff's scouts turned back,
but I keep catching sight of someone back there. I never get a good
glimpse of them, though."
"It's the mist
spirit," Vin said, walking by and dumping an armload of wood
beside the firepit. "It's chasing us."
Spook and Elend
shared a look. Then Elend nodded, refusing to act on Spook's
uncomfortable stare. "Well, as long as it stays out of our way,
it's not a problem, right?"
Vin shrugged. "I
hope not. If you see it, though, call for me. The records say it can
be dangerous."
"All right,"
Elend said. "We'll do that. Now, let's decide what to have for
breakfast."
Straff woke up.
That was his first surprise.
He lay in bed,
inside his tent, feeling like someone had picked him up and slammed
him against the wall a few times. He groaned, sitting up. His body
was free from bruises, but he ached, and his head was pounding. One
of the army healers, a young man with a full beard and bulging eyes,
sat beside his bed. The man studied Straff for a moment.
"You, my lord,
should be dead," the young man said.
"I'm not,"
Straff said, sitting up. "Give me some tin."
A soldier
approached with a metal vial. Straff downed it, then scowled at how
dry and sore his throat was. He burned the tin only lightly; it made
his wounds feel worse, but he had come to depend on the slight edge
the enhanced senses gave him.
"How long?"
he asked.
"Better part
of three days, my lord," the healer said. "We . . . weren't
sure what you'd eaten, or why. We thought about trying to get you to
vomit, but it appeared that you'd taken the draught of your own
choice, so . . . "
"You did
well," Straff said, holding his arm up in front of him. It still
shook a bit, and he couldn't make it stop. "Who is in charge of
the army?"
"General
Janarle," the healer said.
Straff nodded. "Why
hasn't he had me killed?"
The healer blinked
in surprise, glancing at the soldiers.
"My lord,"
said Grent the soldier, "who would dare betray you? Any man who
tried would end up dead in his tent. General Janarle was most
worried about your safety."
Of course,
Straff realized with shock. They don't know that Zane is gone. Why
. . . if I did die, then everyone assumes that Zane would either take
control himself, or get revenge on those he thought responsible.
Straff laughed out loud, shocking those watching over him. Zane had
tried to kill him, but had accidentally saved his life by sheer force
of reputation.
I beat you,
Straff realized. You're gone, and I'm alive. That didn't, of
course, mean that Zane wouldn't return—but, then again, he
might not. Perhaps . . . just maybe . . . Straff was rid of him
forever.
"Elend's
Mistborn," Straff said suddenly.
"We followed
her for a while, my lord," Grent said. "But, they got too
far from the army, and Lord Janarle ordered the scouts back. It
appears she's making for Terris."
He frowned. "Who
else was with her?"
"We think your
son Elend escaped as well," the soldier said. "But it could
have been a decoy."
Zane did it,
Straff thought with shock. He actually got rid of her.
Unless it's a
trick of some sort. But, then . . .
"The koloss
army?" Straff asked.
"There's been
a lot of fighting in its ranks lately, sir," Grent said. "The
beasts seem more restless."
"Order our
army to break camp," Straff said. "Immediately. We're
retreating back toward the Northern Dominance."
"My lord?"
Grent said with shock. "I think Lord Janarle is planning an
assault, waiting only for your word. The city is weak, and their
Mistborn is gone."
"We're pulling
back," Straff said, smiling. "For a while, at least."
Let's see if this plan of yours works, Zane.
Sazed sat in a
small kitchen alcove, hands on the table before him, a metallic ring
glittering on each finger. They were small, for metalminds, but
storing up Feruchemical attributes took time. It would take weeks to
fill even a ring's worth of metal—and he barely had days. In
fact, Sazed was surprised the koloss had waited so long.
Three days. Not
much time at all, but he suspected he would need every available edge
in the approaching conflict. So far he'd been able to store up a
small amount of each attribute. Enough for a boost in an emergency,
once his other metalminds ran out.
Clubs hobbled into
the kitchen. He seemed a blur to Sazed. Even wearing his
spectacles—to help compensate for the vision he was storing in
a tinmind—it was difficult for him to see.
"That's it,"
Clubs said, his voice muffled—another tinmind was taking
Sazed's hearing. "They're finally gone."
Sazed paused for a
moment, trying to decipher the comment. His thoughts moved as if
through a thick, turgid soup, and it took him a moment to understand
what Clubs had said.
They're gone.
Straff's troops. They've withdrawn. He coughed quietly before
replying. "Did he ever respond to any of Lord Penrod's
messages?"
"No,"
Clubs said. "But he did execute the last messenger."
Well, that isn't
a very good sign, Sazed thought slowly. Of course, there hadn't
been very many good signs over the last few days. The city was on the
edge of starvation, and their brief respite of warmth was over. It
would snow this evening, if Sazed guessed right. That made him feel
even more guilty to be sitting in the kitchen nook, beside a warm
hearth, sipping broth as his metalminds sapped his strength, health,
senses, and power of thought. He had rarely tried to fill so many at
once.
"You don't
look so good," Clubs noted, sitting.
Sazed blinked,
thinking through the comment. "My . . . goldmind," he said
slowly. "It draws my health, storing it up." He glanced at
his bowl of broth. "I must eat to maintain my strength," he
said, mentally preparing himself to take a sip.
It was an odd
process. His thoughts moved so slowly that it took him a moment to
decide to eat. Then his body reacted slowly, the arm taking a few
seconds to move. Even then, the muscles quivered, their strength
sapped away and stored in his pewtermind. Finally, he was able to get
a spoonful to his lips and take a quiet sip. It tasted bland; he was
filling scent as well, and without it, his sense of taste was
severely hampered.
He should probably
be lying down—but if he did that, he was liable to sleep. And,
while sleeping, he couldn't fill metalminds—or, at least, he
could fill only one. A bronzemind, the metal that stored wakefulness,
would force him to sleep longer in exchange for letting him go longer
without sleep on another occasion.
Sazed sighed,
carefully setting down his spoon, then coughing. He'd done his best
to help avert the conflict. His best plan had been to send a letter
to Lord Penrod, urging him to inform Straff Venture that Vin was gone
from the city. He had hoped that Straff would then be willing to make
a deal. Apparently, that tactic had been unsuccessful. Nobody had
heard from Straff in days.
Their doom
approached like the inevitable sunrise. Penrod had allowed three
separate groups of townspeople—one of them composed of
nobility—to try to flee Luthadel. Straff's soldiers, more wary
after Elend's escape, had caught and slaughtered each group. Penrod
had even sent a messenger to Lord Jastes Lekal, hoping to strike some
deal with the Southern leader, but the messenger had not returned
from the koloss camp.
"Well,"
Clubs said, "at least we kept them off for a few days."
Sazed thought for a
moment. "It was simply a delay of the inevitable, I fear."
"Of course it
was," Clubs said. "But it was an important delay. Elend and
Vin will be almost four days away by now. If the fighting had started
too soon, you can bet that little Miss Mistborn would have come back
and gotten herself killed trying to save us."
"Ah,"
Sazed said slowly, forcing himself to reach for another spoonful of
broth. The spoon was a dull weight in his numb fingers; his sense of
touch, of course, was being siphoned into a tinmind. "How are
the city defenses coming?" he asked as he struggled with the
spoon.
"Terribly,"
Clubs said. "Twenty thousand troops may sound like a lot—but
try stringing them out through a city this big."
"But the
koloss won't have any siege equipment," Sazed said, focused on
his spoon. "Or archers."
"Yes,"
Clubs said. "But we have eight city gates to protect—and
any of five are within quick reach of the koloss. None of those gates
was built to withstand an attack. And, as it stands, I can barely
post a couple thousand guards at each gate, since I really don't know
which way the koloss will come first."
"Oh,"
Sazed said quietly.
"What did you
expect, Terrisman?" Clubs asked. "Good news? The koloss are
bigger, stronger, and far crazier than we are. And they have an
advantage in numbers."
Sazed closed his
eyes, quivering spoon held halfway to his lips. He suddenly felt a
weakness unrelated to his metalminds. Why didn't she go with them?
Why didn't she escape?
As Sazed opened his
eyes, he saw Clubs waving for a servant to bring him something to
eat. The young girl returned with a bowl of soup. Clubs eyed it with
dissatisfaction for a moment, but then lifted a knotted hand and
began to slurp. He shot a glance at Sazed. "You expecting an
apology out of me, Terrisman?" he asked between spoonfuls.
Sazed sat shocked
for a moment. "Not at all, Lord Cladent," he finally said.
"Good,"
Clubs said. "You're a decent enough person. You're just
confused."
Sazed sipped his
soup, smiling. "That is comforting to hear. I think." He
thought for a moment. "Lord Cladent. I have a religion for you."
Clubs frowned. "You
don't give up, do you?"
Sazed looked down.
It took him a moment to gather together what he'd been thinking about
before. "What you said earlier, Lord Cladent. About situational
morality. It made me think of a faith, known as Dadradah. Its
practitioners spanned many countries and peoples; they believed that
there was only one God, and that there was only one right way to
worship."
Clubs snorted. "I'm
really not interested in one of your dead religions, Terrisman. I
think that—"
"They were
artists," Sazed said quietly.
Clubs hesitated.
"They thought
art drew one closer to God," Sazed said. "They were most
interested in color and hue, and they were fond of writing poetry
describing the colors they saw in the world around them."
Clubs was silent.
"Why preach this religion to me?" he demanded. "Why
not pick one that is blunt, like I am? Or one that worshipped warfare
and soldiers?"
"Because, Lord
Cladent," Sazed said. He blinked, recalling memories with effort
through his muddled mind. "That is not you. It is what you must
do, but it is not you. The others forget, I think, that you were a
woodworker. An artist. When we lived in your shop, I often saw you,
putting the finishing touches on pieces your apprentices had carved.
I saw the care you used. That shop was no simple front for you. You
miss it, I know."
Clubs didn't
respond.
"You must live
as a soldier," Sazed said, pulling something from his sash with
a weak hand. "But you can still dream like an artist. Here. I
had this made for you. It is a symbol of the Dadradah faith. To its
people, being an artist was a higher calling, even, than being a
priest."
He set the wooden
disk on the table. Then, with effort, he smiled at Clubs. It had been
a long time since he had preached a religion, and he wasn't certain
what had made him decide to offer this one to Clubs. Perhaps it was
to prove to himself that there was value in them. Perhaps it was
stubbornness, reacting against the things Clubs had said earlier.
Either way, he found satisfaction in the way that Clubs stared at the
simple wooden disk with the carved picture of a brush on it.
The last time I
preached a religion, he thought, I was in that village to the south,
the one where Marsh found me.
Whatever
happened to him, anyway? Why didn't he return to the city?
"Your woman
has been looking for you," Clubs finally said, looking up,
leaving the disk on the table.
"My
woman?" Sazed said. "Why, we are not . . . " He
trailed off as Clubs eyed him. The surly general was quite proficient
at meaningful looks.
"Very well,"
Sazed said, sighing. He glanced down at his fingers and the ten
glittering rings they bore. Four were tin: sight, hearing, scent, and
touch. He continued to fill these; they wouldn't handicap him much.
He released his pewtermind, however, as well as his steelmind and his
zincmind.
Immediately,
strength refilled his body. His muscles stopped sagging, reverting
from emaciated to healthy. The fuzz lifted from his mind, allowing
him to think clearly, and the thick, swollen slowness evaporated. He
stood, invigorated.
"That's
fascinating," Clubs mumbled.
Sazed looked down.
"I could see
the change," Clubs said. "Your body grew stronger, and your
eyes focused. Your arms stopped shaking. I guess you don't want to
face that woman without all of your faculties, eh? I don't blame
you." Clubs grunted to himself, then continued to eat.
Sazed bid farewell
to the man, then strode out of the kitchen. His feet and hands still
seemed like nearly unfeeling lumps. Yet, he felt an energy. There was
nothing like simple contrast to awaken a man's sense of
indomitability.
And there was
nothing that could sap that sensation more quickly than the prospect
of meeting with the woman he loved. Why had Tindwyl stayed? And, if
she was determined not to go back to Terris, why had she avoided him
these last few days? Was she mad that he had sent Elend away? Was she
disappointed that he insisted on staying to help?
He found her inside
Keep Venture's grand ballroom. He paused for a moment, impressed—as
always—by the room's unquestionable majesty. He released his
sight tinmind for just a moment, removing his spectacles as he looked
around the awesome space.
Enormous,
rectangular stained-glass windows reached to the ceiling along both
walls of the huge room. Standing at the side, Sazed was dwarfed by
massive pillars that supported a small gallery that ran beneath the
windows on either side of the chamber. Every bit of stone in the room
seemed carved—every tile a part of one mosaic or another, every
bit of glass colored to sparkle in the early-evening sunlight.
It's been so
long . . . he thought. The first time he'd seen this chamber, he
had been escorting Vin to her first ball. It was then, while playing
the part of Valette Renoux, she had met Elend. Sazed had chastised
her for carelessly attracting the attention of so powerful a man.
And now he himself
had performed their marriage. He smiled, replacing his spectacles and
filling his eyesight tinmind again. May the Forgotten Gods watch
over you, children. Make something of our sacrifice, if you can.
Tindwyl stood
speaking with Dockson and a small group of functionaries at the
center of the room. They were crowded around a large table, and as
Sazed approached, he could see what was spread atop it.
Marsh's map,
he thought. It was an extensive and detailed representation of
Luthadel, complete with notations about Ministry activity. Sazed had
a visual image of the map, as well as a detailed description of it,
in one of his copperminds—and he had sent a physical copy to
the Synod.
Tindwyl and the
others had covered the large map with their own notations. Sazed
approached slowly, and as soon as Tindwyl saw him, she waved for him
to approach.
"Ah, Sazed,"
Dockson said in a businesslike tone, voice muddled to Sazed's weak
ears. "Good. Please, come here."
Sazed stepped up
onto the low dance floor, joining them at the table. "Troop
placements?" he asked.
"Penrod has
taken command of our armies," Dockson said. "And he's put
noblemen in charge of all twenty battalions. We're not certain we
like that situation."
Sazed looked over
the men at the table. They were a group of scribes that Dockson
himself had trained—all skaa. Gods! Sazed thought. He
can't be planning a rebellion now of all times, can he?
"Don't look so
frightened, Sazed," Dockson said. "We're not going to do
anything too drastic—Penrod is still letting Clubs organize the
city defenses, and he seems to be taking advice from his military
commanders. Besides, it's far too late to try something too
ambitious."
Dockson almost
seemed disappointed.
"However,"
Dockson said, pointing at the map, "I don't trust these
commanders he's put in charge. They don't know anything about
warfare—or even about survival. They've spent their lives
ordering drinks and throwing parties."
Why do you hate
them so? Sazed thought. Ironically, Dockson was the one in the
crew who looked most like a nobleman. He was more natural in a
suit than Breeze, more articulate than Clubs or Spook. Only his
insistence on wearing a very unaristocratic half beard made him stand
out.
"The nobility
may not know warfare," Sazed said, "but they are
experienced with command, I think."
"True,"
Dockson said. "But so are we. That's why I want one of our
people near each gate, just in case things go poorly and someone
really competent needs to take command."
Dockson pointed at
the table, toward one of the gates—Steel Gate. It bore a
notation of a thousand men in a defensive formation. "This is
your battalion, Sazed. Steel Gate is the farthest the koloss are
likely to reach, and so you might not even see any fighting. However,
when the battle begins, I want you there with a group of messengers
to bring word back to Keep Venture in case your gate gets attacked.
We'll set up a command post here in the main ballroom—it's
easily accessible with those broad doors, and can accommodate a lot
of motion."
And it was a
not-so-subtle smack in the face of Elend Venture, and nobility in
general, to use such a beautiful chamber as a setting from which to
run a war. No wonder he supported me in sending Elend and Vin
away. With them gone, he's gained undisputed control of Kelsier's
crew.
It wasn't a bad
thing. Dockson was an organizational genius and a master of quick
planning. He did have certain prejudices, however.
"I know you
don't like to fight, Saze," Dockson said, leaning down on the
table with both hands. "But we need you."
"I think he is
preparing for battle, Lord Dockson," Tindwyl said, eyeing Sazed.
"Those rings on his fingers give good indication of his
intentions."
Sazed glanced
across the table at her. "And what is your place in this,
Tindwyl?"
"Lord Dockson
came to me for advice," Tindwyl said. "He has little
experience with warfare himself, and wished to know the things I have
studied about the generals of the past."
"Ah,"
Sazed said. He turned to Dockson, frowning in thought. Eventually, he
nodded. "Very well. I will take part in your project—but,
I must warn you against divisiveness. Please, tell your men not to
break the chain of command unless they absolutely must."
Dockson nodded.
"Now, Lady
Tindwyl," Sazed said. "Might we speak for a moment in
private?"
She nodded, and
they excused themselves, walking under the nearest overhanging
gallery. In the shadows, behind one of the pillars, Sazed turned
toward Tindwyl. She looked so pristine—so poised, so
calm—despite the dire situation. How did she do that?
"You're
storing quite a large number of attributes, Sazed," Tindwyl
noted, glancing at his fingers again. "Surely you have other
metalminds prepared from before?"
"I used all of
my wakefulness and speed making my way to Luthadel," Sazed said.
"And I have no health stored at all—I used up the last of
it overcoming a sickness when I was teaching in the South. I always
intended to fill another one, but we've been too busy. I do have some
large amount of strength and weight stored, as well as a good
selection of tinminds. Still, one can never be too well
prepared, I think."
"Perhaps,"
Tindwyl said. She glanced back at the group around the table. "If
it gives us something to do other than think about the inevitable,
then preparation has not been wasted, I think."
Sazed felt a chill.
"Tindwyl," he said quietly. "Why did you stay? There
is no place for you here."
"There is no
place for you either, Sazed."
"These are my
friends," he said. "I will not leave them."
"Then why did
you convince their leaders to leave?"
"To flee and
live," Sazed said.
"Survival is
not a luxury often afforded to leaders," Tindwyl said. "When
they accept the devotion of others, they must accept the
responsibility that comes with it. This people will die—but
they need not die feeling betrayed."
"They were
not—"
"They expect
to be saved, Sazed," Tindwyl hissed quietly. "Even those
men over there—even Dockson, the most practical one in
this bunch—think that they'll survive. And do you know why?
Because, deep down, they believe that something will save them.
Something that saved them before, the only piece of the Survivor they
have left. She represents hope to them now. And you sent her away."
"To live,
Tindwyl," Sazed repeated. "It would have been a waste to
lose Vin and Elend here."
"Hope is never
wasted," Tindwyl said, eyes flashing. "I thought you of all
people would understand that. You think it was stubbornness that kept
me alive all those years in the hands of the Breeders?"
"And is it
stubbornness or hope that kept you here, in the city?" he asked.
She looked up at
him. "Neither."
Sazed looked at her
for a long moment in the shadowed alcove. Planners talked in the
ballroom, their voices echoing. Shards of light from the windows
reflected off the marble floors, throwing slivers of illumination
across the walls. Slowly, awkwardly, Sazed put his arms around
Tindwyl. She sighed, letting him hold her.
He released his
tinminds and let his senses return in a flood.
Softness from her
skin and warmth from her body washed across him as she moved farther
into the embrace, resting her head against his chest. The scent of
her hair—unperfumed, but clean and crisp—filled his nose,
the first thing he'd smelled in three days. With a clumsy hand, Sazed
pulled free his spectacles so he could see her clearly. As sounds
returned fully to his ears, he could hear Tindwyl breathing beside
him.
"Do you know
why I love you, Sazed?" she asked quietly.
"I cannot
fathom," he answered honestly.
"Because you
never give in," she said. "Other men are strong like
bricks—firm, unyielding, but if you pound on them long enough,
they crack. You . . . you're strong like the wind. Always there, so
willing to bend, but never apologetic for the times when you must be
firm. I don't think any of your friends understand what a power they
had in you."
Had, he
thought. She already thinks of all this in the past tense. And . .
. it feels right for her to do so. "I fear that whatever I
have won't be enough to save them," Sazed whispered.
"It was enough
to save three of them, though," Tindwyl said. "You were
wrong to send them away . . . but maybe you were right, too."
Sazed just closed
his eyes and held her, cursing her for staying, yet loving her for it
all the same.
At that moment, the
wall-top warning drums began to beat.
And so, I have
made one final gamble.





51
THE MISTY RED LIGHT
OF morning was a thing that should not have existed. Mist died before
daylight. Heat made it evaporate; even locking it inside of a closed
room made it condense and disappear. It shouldn't have been able to
withstand the light of the rising sun.
Yet it did. The
farther they'd gotten from Luthadel, the longer the mists lingered in
the mornings. The change was slight—they were still only a few
days' ride from Luthadel—but Vin knew. She saw the difference.
This morning, the mists seemed even stronger than she'd
anticipated—they didn't even weaken as the sun came up. They
obscured its light.
Mist, she
thought. Deepness. She was increasingly sure that she was
right about it, though she couldn't know for certain. Still, it felt
right to her for some reason. The Deepness hadn't been some monster
or tyrant, but a force more natural—and therefore more
frightening. A creature could be killed. The mists . . . they were
far more daunting. The Deepness wouldn't oppress with priests, but
use the people's own superstitious terror. It wouldn't slaughter with
armies, but with starvation.
How did one fight
something larger than a continent? A thing that couldn't feel anger,
pain, hope, or mercy?
Yet, it was Vin's
task to do just that. She sat quietly on a large boulder beside the
night's firepit, her legs up, knees to her chest. Elend still slept;
Spook was out scouting.
She didn't question
her place any longer. She was either mad or she was the Hero of Ages.
It was her task to defeat the mists. Yet . . . she thought,
frowning. Shouldn't the thumpings be getting louder, not softer?
The longer they traveled, the weaker the thumpings seemed. Was she
too late? Was something happening at the Well to dampen its power?
Had someone else already taken it?
We have to keep
moving.
Another person in
her place might have asked why he had been chosen. Vin had known
several men—both in Camon's crew and in Elend's government—who
would complain every time they were given an assignment. "Why
me?" they would ask. The insecure ones didn't think they were up
to the task. The lazy ones wanted out of the work.
Vin didn't consider
herself to be either self-assured or self-motivated. Still, she saw
no point in asking why. Life had taught her that sometimes things
simply happened. Often, there hadn't been any specific reason for
Reen to beat her. And, reasons were weak comforts, anyway. The
reasons that Kelsier had needed to die were clear to her, but that
didn't make her miss him any less.
She had a job to
do. The fact that she didn't understand it didn't stop her from
acknowledging that she had to try to accomplish it. She simply hoped
that she'd know what to do when the time came. Though the thumpings
were weaker, they were still there. They drew her forward. To the
Well of Ascension.
Behind her, she
could feel the lesser vibration of the mist spirit. It never
disappeared until the mists themselves did. It had been there all
morning, standing just behind her.
"Do you know
the secret to this all?" she asked quietly, turning toward the
spirit in the reddish mists. "Do you have—"
The Allomantic
pulse of the mist spirit was coming from directly inside the tent she
shared with Elend.
Vin jumped off the
rock, landing on the frosted ground and scrambling to the tent. She
threw open the flaps. Elend slept inside, head just barely visible as
it poked out of the blankets. Mist filled the small tent, swirling,
twisting—and that was odd enough. Mist didn't usually enter
tents.
And there, in the
middle of the mists, was the spirit. Standing directly above Elend.
It wasn't even
really there. It was just an outline in the mists, a repeating
pattern caused by chaotic movements. And yet it was real. She could
feel it, and she could see it—see it as it looked up, meeting
her gaze with invisible eyes.
Hateful eyes.
It raised an
insubstantial arm, and Vin saw something flash. She reacted
immediately, whipping out a dagger, bursting into the tent and
swinging. Her blow met something tangible in the mist spirit's hand.
A metallic sound rang in the calm air, and Vin felt a powerful,
numbing chill in her arm. The hairs across her entire body prickled.
And then it
disappeared. Fading away, like the ringing of its somehow substantial
blade. Vin blinked, then turned to look through the blowing tent
flap. The mists outside were gone; day had finally won.
It didn't seem to
have many victories remaining.
"Vin?"
Elend asked, yawning and stirring.
Vin calmed her
breathing. The spirit had gone. The daylight meant safety, for now.
Once, it was the nights that I found safe, she thought.
Kelsier gave them to me.
"What's
wrong?" Elend asked. How could someone, even a nobleman, be so
slow to rise, so unconcerned about the vulnerability he displayed
while sleeping?
She sheathed her
dagger. What can I tell him? How can I protect him from something
I can barely see? She needed to think. "It was nothing,"
she said quietly. "Just me . . . being jumpy again."
Elend rolled over,
sighing contentedly. "Is Spook doing his morning scout?"
"Yes."
"Wake me when
he gets back."
Vin nodded, but he
probably couldn't see her. She knelt, looking at him as the sun rose
behind her. She'd given herself to him—not just her body, and
not just her heart. She'd abandoned her rationalizations, given away
her reservations, all for him. She could no longer afford to think
that she wasn't worthy of him, no longer give herself the false
comfort of believing they couldn't ever be together.
She'd never trusted
anyone this much. Not Kelsier, not Sazed, not Reen. Elend had
everything. That knowledge made her tremble inside. If she lost him,
she would lose herself.
I mustn't think
about that! she told herself, rising. She left the tent, quietly
closing the flaps behind her. In the distance, shadows moved. Spook
appeared a moment later.
"Someone's
definitely back there," he said quietly. "Not spirits, Vin.
Five men, with a camp."
Vin frowned.
"Following us?"
"They must
be."
Straff's scouts,
she thought. "We'll let Elend decide what to do about them."
Spook shrugged,
walking over to sit on her rock. "You going to wake him?"
Vin turned back.
"Let him sleep a little longer."
Spook shrugged
again. He watched as she walked over to the firepit and unwrapped the
wood they'd covered the night before, then began to build a fire.
"You've
changed, Vin," Spook said.
She continued to
work. "Everyone changes," she said. "I'm not a thief
anymore, and I have friends to support me."
"I don't mean
that," Spook said. "I mean recently. This last week. You're
different than you were."
"Different
how?"
"I don't know.
You don't seem as frightened all the time."
Vin paused. "I've
made some decisions. About who I am, and who I will be. About what I
want."
She worked quietly
for a moment, and finally got a spark to catch. "I'm tired of
putting up with foolishness," she finally said. "Other
people's foolishness, and my own. I've decided to act, rather than
second-guess. Perhaps it's a more immature way of looking at things.
But it feels right, for now."
"It's not
immature," Spook said.
Vin smiled, looking
up at him. Sixteen and hardly grown into his body, he was the same
age that she'd been when Kelsier had recruited her. He was squinting
against the light, even though the sun was low.
"Lower your
tin," Vin said. "No need to keep it on so strong."
Spook shrugged. She
could see the uncertainty in him. He wanted so badly to be useful.
She knew that feeling.
"What about
you, Spook?" she said, turning to gather the breakfast supplies.
Broth and mealcakes again. "How have you been lately?"
He shrugged yet
again.
I'd almost
forgotten what it was like to try and have a conversation with a
teenage boy, she thought, smiling.
"Spook . . . "
she said, just testing out the name. "What do you think of that
nickname, anyway? I remember when everyone called you by your real
name." Lestibournes—Vin had tried to spell it once. She'd
gotten about five letters in.
"Kelsier gave
me my name," Spook said, as if that were reason enough to keep
it. And perhaps it was. Vin saw the look in Spook's eyes when he
mentioned Kelsier; Clubs might be Spook's uncle, but Kelsier had been
the one he looked up to.
Of course, they all
had looked up to Kelsier.
"I wish I were
powerful, Vin," Spook said quietly, arms folded on his knees as
he sat on the rock. "Like you."
"You have your
own skills."
"Tin?"
Spook asked. "Almost worthless. If I were Mistborn, I could do
great things. Be someone important."
"Being
important isn't all that wonderful, Spook," Vin said, listening
to the thumpings in her head. "Most of the time, it's just
annoying."
Spook shook his
head. "If I were Mistborn, I could save people—help
people, who need it. I could stop people from dying. But . . . I'm
just Spook. Weak. A coward."
Vin looked at him,
frowning, but his head was bowed, and he wouldn't meet her eyes.
What was that
about? she wondered.
Sazed used a bit of
strength to help him take the steps three at a time. He burst out of
the stairwell just behind Tindwyl, the two of them joining the
remaining members of the crew on the wall top. The drums still
sounded; each had a different rhythm as it sounded over the city. The
mixing beats echoed chaotically from buildings and alleyways.
The northern
horizon seemed bare without Straff's army. If only that same
emptiness had extended to the northeast, where the koloss camp seemed
in turmoil.
"Can anyone
make out what's going on?" Breeze asked.
Ham shook his head.
"Too far."
"One of my
scouts is a Tineye," Clubs said, hobbling over. "He raised
the alarm. Said the koloss were fighting."
"My good man,"
Breeze said, "aren't the foul creatures always fighting?"
"More than
usual," Clubs said. "Massive brawl."
Sazed felt a swift
glimmer of hope. "They're fighting?" he said. "Perhaps
they will kill each other!"
Clubs eyed him with
one of those looks. "Read one of your books, Terrisman. What do
they say about koloss emotions?"
"They only
have two," Sazed said. "Boredom and rage. But—"
"This is how
they always begin a battle," Tindwyl said quietly. "They
start to fight among themselves, enraging more and more of their
members, and then . . . "
She trailed off,
and Sazed saw it. The dark smudge to the east growing lighter.
Dispersing. Resolving into individual members.
Charging the city.
"Bloody hell,"
Clubs swore, then quickly began to hobble down the steps. "Messengers
away!" he bellowed. "Archers to the wall! Secure the river
grates! Battalions, form positions! Get ready to fight! Do you want
those things breaking in here and getting at your children!"
Chaos followed. Men
began to dash in all directions. Soldiers scrambled up the
stairwells, clogging the way down, keeping the crew from moving.
It's happening,
Sazed thought numbly.
"Once the
stairwells are open," Dockson said quietly, "I want each of
you to go to your battalion. Tindwyl, you have Tin Gate, in the north
by Keep Venture. I might need your advice, but for now, stay with
those boys. They'll listen to you—they respect Terrismen.
Breeze, you have one of your Soothers in each of battalions four
through twelve?"
Breeze nodded.
"They aren't much, though . . . ."
"Just have
them keep those boys fighting!" Dockson said. "Don't let
our men break!"
"A thousand
men are far too many for one Soother to handle, my friend,"
Breeze said.
"Have them do
the best they can," Dockson said. "You and Ham take Pewter
Gate and Zinc Gate—looks like the koloss are going to hit here
first. Clubs should bring in reinforcements."
The two men nodded;
then Dockson looked at Sazed. "You know where to go?"
"Yes . . .
yes, I think so," Sazed said, gripping the wall. In the air,
flakes of ash began to fall from the sky.
"Go, then!"
Dockson said as one final squad of archers made its way out of the
stairwell.
"My lord
Venture!"
Straff turned. With
some stimulants, he was able to remain strong enough to stay atop his
saddle—though he wouldn't have dared to fight. Of course, he
wouldn't have fought anyway. That wasn't his way. One brought armies
to do such things.
He turned his
animal as the messenger approached. The man puffed, putting hands on
knees as he stopped beside Straff's mount, bits of ash swirling on
the ground at his feet.
"My lord,"
the man said. "The koloss army has attacked Luthadel!"
Just as you
said, Zane, Straff thought in wonder.
"The koloss,
attacking?" Lord Janarle asked, moving his horse up beside
Straff's. The handsome lord frowned, then eyed Straff. "You
expected this, my lord?"
"Of course,"
Straff said, smiling.
Janarle looked
impressed.
"Pass an order
to the men, Janarle," Straff said. "I want this column
turned back toward Luthadel."
"We can be
there in an hour, my lord!" Janarle said.
"No,"
Straff said. "Let's take our time. We wouldn't want to overwork
our troops, would we?"
Janarle smiled. "Of
course not, my lord."
Arrows seemed to
have little effect on the koloss.
Sazed stood,
transfixed and appalled, atop his gate's watchtower. He wasn't
officially in charge of the men, so he didn't have any orders to
give. He simply stood with the scouts and messengers, waiting to see
if he was needed or not.
That left him
plenty of time to watch the horror unfolding. The koloss weren't
charging his section of the wall yet, thankfully, and his men stood
watching tensely as the creatures barreled toward Tin Gate and Pewter
Gate in the distance.
Even far away—the
tower letting him see over a section of the city to where Tin Gate
lay—Sazed could see the koloss running straight through
hailstorms of arrows. Some of the smaller ones appeared to fall dead
or wounded, but most just continued to charge. Men murmured on the
tower near him.
We aren't ready
for this, Sazed thought. Even with months to plan and
anticipate, we aren't ready.
This is what we
get, being ruled over by a god for a thousand years. A thousand years
of peace—tyrannical peace, but peace nonetheless. We don't have
generals, we have men who know how to order a bath drawn. We don't
have tacticians, we have bureaucrats. We don't have warriors, we have
boys with sticks.
Even as he watched
the oncoming doom, his scholar's mind was analytical. Tapping sight,
he could see that many of the distant creatures—especially the
larger ones—carried small uprooted trees. They were ready, in
their own way, to break into the city. The trees wouldn't be as
effective as real battering rams—but then, the city gates
weren't built to withstand a real battering in the first place.
Those koloss are
smarter than we give them credit for, he thought. They can
recognize the abstract value of coins, even if they don't have an
economy. They can see that they'll need tools to break down our
doors, even if they don't know how to make those tools.
The first koloss
wave reached the wall. Men began to toss down rocks and other items.
Sazed's own section had similar piles, one just next to the gate
arch, beside which he stood. But arrows had almost no effect; what
good would a few rocks do? Koloss clumped around the base of the
wall, like the water of a dammed-up river. Distant thumps sounded as
the creatures began to beat against the gates.
"Battalion
sixteen!" a messenger called from below, riding up to Sazed's
gate. "Lord Culee!"
"Here!" a
man called from the wall top beside Sazed's tower.
"Pewter Gate
needs reinforcements immediately! Lord Penrod commands you to bring
six companies and follow me!"
Lord Culee began to
give the orders. Six companies . . . Sazed thought. Six
hundred of our thousand. Clubs's words from earlier returned to
him: Twenty thousand men might seem like a lot, until one saw how
thinly they had to be stretched.
The six companies
marched away, leaving the courtyard before Sazed's gate disturbingly
empty. The four hundred remaining men—three hundred in the
courtyard, one hundred on the wall—shuffled quietly.
Sazed closed his
eyes and tapped his hearing tinmind. He could hear . . . wood beating
on wood. Screams. Human screams. He released the tinmind quickly,
then tapped eyesight again, leaning out and looking toward the
section of the wall where the battle was being fought. The koloss
were throwing back the fallen rocks—and they were far more
accurate than the defenders. Sazed jumped as he saw a young soldier's
face crushed, his body thrown back off the wall top by the rock's
force. Sazed released his tinmind, breathing quickly.
"Be firm,
men!" called one of the soldiers on the wall. He was barely a
youth—a nobleman, but he couldn't be more than sixteen. Of
course, a lot of the men in the army were that age.
"Stand firm .
. . " the young commander repeated. His voice sounded uncertain,
and it trailed off as he noticed something in the distance. Sazed
turned, following the man's gaze.
The koloss had
gotten tired of standing around, piling up at a single gate. They
were moving to surround the city, large groups of them breaking up,
fording the River Channerel toward other gates.
Gates like Sazed's.
Vin landed directly
in the middle of the camp. She tossed a handful of pewter dust into
the firepit, then Pushed, blowing coals, soot, and smoke across a
pair of surprised guards, who had been fixing breakfast. She reached
out and Pulled out the stakes of the three small tents.
All three
collapsed. One was unoccupied, but cries came from the other two. The
canvas outlined struggling, confused figures—one inside the
larger tent, two inside the smaller one.
The guards
scrambled back, raising their arms to protect their eyes from the
soot and sparks, their hands reaching for swords. Vin raised a fist
toward them—and, as they blinked their eyes clear, she let a
single coin drop to the ground.
The guards froze,
then took their hands off their swords. Vin eyed the tents. The
person in charge would be inside the larger one—and he was the
man she would need to deal with. Probably one of Straff's captains,
though the guards didn't wear Venture heraldry. Perhaps—
Jastes Lekal poked
his head out of his tent, cursing as he extricated himself from the
canvas. He'd changed much in the two years since Vin had last seen
him. However, there had been hints of what the man would become. His
thin figure had become spindly; his balding head had fulfilled its
promise. Yet, how had his face come to look so haggard . . . so old?
He was Elend's age.
"Jastes,"
Elend said, stepping out of his hiding place in the forest. He walked
into the clearing, Spook at his side. "Why are you here?"
Jastes managed to
stand as his other two soldiers cut their way out of their tent. He
waved them down. "El," he said. "I . . . didn't know
where else to go. My scouts said that you were fleeing, and it seemed
like a good idea. Wherever you're going, I want to go with you. We
can hide there, maybe. We can—"
"Jastes!"
Elend snapped, striding forward to stand beside Vin. "Where are
your koloss? Did you send them away?"
"I tried,"
Jastes said, looking down. "They wouldn't go—not once
they'd seen Luthadel. And then . . . "
"What?"
Elend demanded.
"A fire,"
Jastes said. "In our . . . supply carts."
Vin frowned.
"Your supply
carts?" Elend said. "The carts where you carried your
wooden coins?"
"Yes."
"Lord Ruler,
man!" Elend said stepping forward. "And you just left
them there, without leadership, outside our home?"
"They would
have killed me, El!" Jastes said. "They were beginning to
fight so much, to demand more coins, to demand we attack the city. If
I'd stayed, they'd have slaughtered me! They're beasts—beasts
that only barely have the shape of man."
"And you
left," Elend said. "You abandoned Luthadel to them."
"You abandoned
it, too," Jastes said. He walked forward, hands pleading as he
approached Elend. "Look, El. I know I was wrong. I thought I
could control them. I didn't mean for this to happen!"
Elend fell silent,
and Vin could see a hardness growing in his eyes. Not a dangerous
hardness, like Kelsier. More of a . . . regal bearing. The sense that
he was more than he wanted to be. He stood straight, looking down at
the man pleading before him.
"You raised an
army of violent monsters and led them in a tyrannical assault,
Jastes," Elend said. "You caused the slaughter of innocent
villages. Then, you abandoned that army without leadership or control
outside the most populated city in the whole of the Final Empire."
"Forgive me,"
Jastes said.
Elend looked the
man in the eyes. "I forgive you," he said quietly. Then, in
one fluid stroke, he drew his sword and sheared Jastes's head from
his shoulders. "But my kingdom cannot."
Vin stared,
dumbfounded, as the corpse fell to the ground. Jastes's soldiers
cried out, drawing their weapons. Elend turned, his face solemn, and
raised the point of his bloodied sword toward them. "You think
this execution was performed in error?"
The guards paused.
"No, my lord," one of them finally said, looking down.
Elend knelt and
cleaned his sword on Jastes's cloak. "Considering what he did,
this was a better death than he deserved." Elend snapped his
sword back into its sheath. "But he was my friend. Bury him.
Once you are through, you are welcome to travel with me to Terris, or
you may go back to your homes. Choose as you wish." With that,
he walked back into the woods.
Vin paused,
watching the guards. Solemnly, they moved forward to collect the
body. She nodded to Spook, then dashed out into the forest after
Elend. She didn't have to go far. She found him sitting on a rock a
short distance away, staring at the ground. An ashfall had begun, but
most of the flakes got caught in the trees, coating their leaves like
black moss.
"Elend?"
she asked.
He looked out,
staring into the forest. "I'm not sure why I did it, Vin,"
he said quietly. "Why should I be the one to bring justice? I'm
not even king. And yet, it had to be done. I felt it. I feel it
still."
She laid a hand on
his shoulder.
"He's the
first man I've ever killed," Elend said. "He and I had such
dreams, once: We'd ally two of the most powerful imperial houses,
uniting Luthadel as never before. Ours wasn't to have been a treaty
of greed, but a true political alliance intended to help make the
city a better place."
He looked up at
her. "I think I understand now, Vin, what it is like for you. In
a way, we're both knives—both tools. Not for each other, but
for this kingdom. This people."
She wrapped her
arms around him, holding him, pulling his head to her chest. "I'm
sorry," she whispered.
"It had to be
done," he said. "The saddest part is, he's right. I
abandoned them, too. I should take my own life with this sword."
"You left for
a good reason, Elend," Vin said. "You left to protect
Luthadel, to make it so Straff wouldn't attack."
"And if the
koloss attack before Straff can?"
"Maybe they
won't," Vin said. "They don't have a leader—maybe
they'll attack Straff's army instead."
"No,"
Spook's voice said. Vin turned, seeing him approach through the
forest, eyes squinting against the light.
That boy burns
way too much tin, she thought.
"What do you
mean?" Elend asked, turning.
Spook looked down.
"They won't attack Straff's army, El. It won't be there
anymore."
"What?"
Vin asked.
"I . . . "
Spook looked away, shame showing in his face.
I'm a coward.
His words from earlier returned to her. "You knew," Vin
said. "You knew the koloss were going to attack!"
Spook nodded.
"That's
ridiculous," Elend said. "You couldn't have known that
Jastes would follow us."
"I didn't,"
Spook said, a lump of ash falling from a tree behind him, bursting
before the wind, and fluttering in a hundred different flakes to the
ground. "But my uncle figured that Straff would withdraw his
army and let the koloss attack the city. That's why Sazed decided to
send us away."
Vin felt a sudden
chill.
I've found the
location of the Well of Ascension, Sazed had said. To the
north. In the Terris Mountains . . . .
"Clubs told
you this?" Elend was saying.
Spook nodded.
"And you
didn't tell me?" Elend demanded, standing.
Oh, no . . . .
Spook paused, then
shook his head. "You would have wanted to go back! I didn't want
to die, El! I'm sorry. I'm a coward." He cringed, glancing at
Elend's sword, shying away.
Elend paused, as if
realizing he'd been stepping toward the boy. "I'm not going to
hurt you, Spook," he said. "I'm just ashamed of you."
Spook lowered his eyes, then sank down to the ground, sitting with
his back to an aspen.
The thumpings,
getting softer . . . .
"Elend,"
Vin whispered.
He turned.
"Sazed lied.
The Well isn't to the north."
"What?"
"It's at
Luthadel."
"Vin, that's
ridiculous. We'd have found it."
"We didn't,"
she said firmly, standing, looking south. Focusing, she could feel
the thumpings, washing across her. Pulling her.
South.
"The Well
can't be to the south," Elend said. "The legends all
place it north, in the Terris Mountains."
Vin shook her head,
confused. "It's there," she said. "I know it is. I
don't know how, but it is there."
Elend looked at
her, then nodded, trusting her instincts.
Oh, Sazed,
she thought. You probably had good intentions, but you may have
doomed us all. If the city fell to the koloss . . .
"How fast can
we get back?" Elend asked.
"That
depends," she said.
"Go back?"
Spook asked, looking up. "El, they're all dead. They told
me to tell you the truth once you got to Tathingdwen, so you wouldn't
kill yourselves climbing the mountains in the winter for nothing.
But, when Clubs talked to me, it was also to say goodbye. I could see
it in his eyes. He knew he'd never see me again."
Elend paused, and
Vin could see a moment of uncertainty in his eyes. A flash of pain,
of terror. She knew those emotions, because they hit her at the same
time.
Sazed, Breeze,
Ham . . .
Elend grabbed her
arm. "You have to go, Vin," he said. "There might be
survivors . . . refugees. They'll need your help."
She nodded, the
firmness of his grip—the determination in his voice—giving
her strength.
"Spook and I
will follow," he said. "It should only take us a couple of
days' hard riding. But an Allomancer with pewter can go faster than
any horse over long distances."
"I don't want
to leave you," she whispered.
"I know."
It was still hard.
How could she run off and leave him, when she'd only just
rediscovered him? Yet, she could feel the Well of Ascension even more
urgently now that she was sure of its location. And if some of her
friends did survive the attack . . .
Vin gritted her
teeth, then opened up her pouch and pulled out the last of her pewter
dust. She drank it down with a mouthful of water from her flask. It
scratched her throat going down. It's not much, she thought.
It won't let me pewter-drag for long.
"They're all
dead . . . " Spook mumbled again.
Vin turned. The
pulses thumped demandingly. From the south.
I'm coming.
"Elend,"
she said. "Please do something for me. Don't sleep during the
night, when the mists are out. Travel during the night, if you can,
and keep your wits about you. Watch for the mist spirit—I think
it may mean you harm."
He frowned, but
nodded.
Vin flared pewter,
then took off at a run toward the highway.
My pleas, my
teachings, my objections, and even my treasons were all ineffectual.
Alendi has other counselors now, ones who tell him what he wants to
hear.





52
BREEZE DID HIS BEST
TO pretend he was not in the middle of a war. It didn't work
very well.
He sat on his horse
at the edge of Zinc Gate's courtyard. Soldiers shuffled and clanked,
standing in ranks before the gates, waiting and watching their
companions atop the wall.
The gates thumped.
Breeze cringed, but continued his Soothing. "Be strong," he
whispered. "Fear, uncertainty—I take these away. Death may
come through those doors, but you can fight it. You can win. Be
strong . . . ."
Brass flared like a
bonfire within his stomach. He had long since used up his vials, and
had taken to choking down handfuls of brass dust and mouthfuls of
water, which he had in a steady supply thanks to Dockson's mounted
messengers.
How long can
this possibly last? he thought, wiping his brow, continuing to
Soothe. Allomancy was, fortunately, very easy on the body; Allomantic
power came from within the metals themselves, not from the one who
burned them. Yet, Soothing was much more complex than other
Allomantic skills, and it demanded constant attention.
"Fear, terror,
anxiety . . . " he whispered. "The desire to run or give
up. I take these from you . . . " The speaking wasn't necessary,
of course, but it had always been his way—it helped keep him
focused.
After a few more
minutes of Soothing, he checked his pocket watch, then turned his
horse and trotted over to the other side of the courtyard. The gates
continued to boom, and Breeze wiped his brow again. He noted, with
dissatisfaction, that his handkerchief was nearly too damp to do him
any good. It was also beginning to snow. The wetness would make the
ash stick to his clothing, and his suit would be absolutely ruined.
The suit will be
ruined by your blood, Breeze, he told himself. The time for
silliness is over. This is serious. Far too serious. How did you even
end up here?
He redoubled his
efforts, Soothing a new group of soldiers. He was one of the most
powerful Allomancers in the Final Empire—especially when it
came to emotional Allomancy. He could Soothe hundreds of men at once,
assuming they were packed close enough together, and assuming that he
was focusing on simple emotions. Even Kelsier hadn't been able to
manage those numbers.
Yet, the entire
crowd of soldiers was beyond even his ability, and he had to do them
in sections. As he began work on the new group, he saw the ones he
had left begin to wilt, their anxiety taking over.
When those doors
burst, these men are going to scatter.
The gates boomed.
Men clustered on the walls, throwing down rocks, shooting arrows,
fighting with a frantic lack of discipline. Occasionally, an officer
would push his way past them, yelling orders, trying to coordinate
their efforts, but Breeze was too far away to tell what they were
saying. He could just see the chaos of men moving, screaming, and
shooting.
And, of course, he
could see the return fire. Rocks zipped into the air from below, some
cracking against the ramparts. Breeze tried not to think about what
was on the other side of the wall, the thousands of enraged koloss
beasts. Occasionally, a soldier would drop. Blood dripped down into
the courtyard from several sections of the ramparts.
"Fear,
anxiety, terror . . . " Breeze whispered.
Allrianne had
escaped. Vin, Elend, and Spook were safe. He had to keep focusing on
those successes. Thank you, Sazed, for making us send them away,
he thought.
Hoofbeats clopped
behind him. Breeze continued his Soothing, but turned to see Clubs
riding up. The general rode his horse with a hunched-over slouch,
eyeing the soldiers with one eye open, the other perpetually squeezed
closed in a squint. "They're doing well," he said.
"My dear man,"
Breeze said. "They're terrified. Even the ones beneath my
Soothing watch those gates like they were some terrible void waiting
to suck them in."
Clubs eyed Breeze.
"Feeling poetic today, are we?"
"Impending
doom has that effect on me," Breeze said as the gates shook.
"Either way, I doubt the men are doing 'well.'"
Clubs grunted. "Men
are always nervous before a fight. But, these are good lads. They'll
hold."
The gates shook and
quivered, splinters appearing at the edges. Those hinges are
straining . . . Breeze thought.
"Don't suppose
you can Soothe those koloss?" Clubs asked. "Make them less
ferocious?"
Breeze shook his
head. "Soothing those beasts has no effect. I've tried it."
They fell silent
again, listening to the booming gates. Eventually, Breeze glanced
over at Clubs, who sat, unperturbed, on his horse. "You've been
in combat before," Breeze said. "How often?"
"Off and on
for the better part of twenty years, when I was younger," Clubs
said. "Fighting rebellions in the distant dominances, warring
against the nomads out in the barrens. The Lord Ruler was pretty good
about keeping those conflicts quiet."
"And . . . how
did you do?" Breeze asked. "Were you often victorious?"
"Always,"
Clubs said.
Breeze smiled
slightly.
"Of course,"
Clubs said, glancing at Breeze, "we were the ones with koloss on
our side. Damn hard to kill, those beasts."
Great,
Breeze thought.
Vin ran.
She'd only been on
one "pewter drag" before—with Kelsier, two years ago.
While burning pewter at a steady flare, one could run with incredible
speed—like a sprinter in their quickest dash—without ever
growing tired.
Yet, the process
did something to a body. Pewter kept her moving, but it also bottled
up her natural fatigue. The juxtaposition made her mind fuzz,
bringing on a trancelike state of exhausted energy. Her soul wanted
so badly to rest, yet her body just kept running, and running, and
running, following the canal towpath toward the south. Toward
Luthadel.
Vin was prepared
for the effects of pewter dragging this time, and so she handled them
far better. She fought off the trance, keeping her mind focused on
her goal, not the repetitive motions of her body. However, that focus
led her to discomforting thoughts.
Why am I doing
this? she wondered. Why push myself so hard? Spook said
it—Luthadel has to have already fallen. There is no need for
urgency.
And yet, she ran.
She saw images of
death in her mind. Ham, Breeze, Dockson, Clubs, and dear, dear Sazed.
The first real friends she had ever known. She loved Elend, and part
of her blessed the others for sending him away from danger. However,
the other piece of her was furious at them for sending her away. That
fury guided her.
They let me
abandon them. They forced me to abandon them!
Kelsier had spent
months teaching her how to trust. His last words to her in life had
been ones of accusation, and they were words she had never been able
to escape. You still have a lot to learn about friendship, Vin.
He had gone on to
risk his life to get Spook and OreSeur out of danger, fighting
off—and eventually killing—a Steel Inquisitor. He had
done this despite Vin's protests that the risk was pointless.
She had been wrong.
How dare they!
she thought, feeling the tears on her cheeks as she dashed down the
canal's highwaylike towpath. Pewter gave her inhuman balance, and the
speed—which would have been perilous for anyone else—felt
natural to her. She didn't trip, she didn't stumble, but an outside
observer would think her pace reckless.
Trees whipped by.
She leapt washouts and dips in the land. She ran as she had done only
once before, and pushed herself even harder than she had on that day.
Before, she had been running simply to keep up with Kelsier. Now she
ran for those she loved.
How dare they!
she thought again. How dare they not give me the same chance that
Kelsier had! How dare they refuse my protection, refuse to let me
help them!
How dare they
die . . .
Her pewter was
running low, and she was only a few hours into her run. True, she had
probably covered an entire day's worth of walking in those few hours.
Yet, somehow, she knew it wouldn't be enough. They were already dead.
She was going to be too late, just as when she'd run years before.
Too late to save their army. Too late to save her friends.
Vin continued to
run. And she continued to cry.
"How did we
get here, Clubs?" Breeze asked quietly, still on the floor of
the courtyard, before the booming gate. He sat on his horse, amid a
muddy mixture of falling snow and ash. The simple, quiet flutterings
of white and black seemed to belie the screaming men, the breaking
gate, and the falling rocks.
Clubs looked over
at him, frowning. Breeze continued stare up at the ash and snow.
Black and white. Lazy.
"We aren't men
of principle," Breeze said quietly. "We're thieves. Cynics.
You, a man tired of doing the Lord Ruler's bidding, a man determined
to see himself get ahead for once. Me, a man of wavering morals who
loves to toy with others, to make their emotions my game. How did we
end up here? Standing at the head of an army, fighting an idealist's
cause? Men like us shouldn't be leaders."
Clubs watched the
men in the courtyard. "Guess we're just idiots," he finally
said.
Breeze paused, then
noticed that glimmer in Clubs's eyes. That spark of humor, the spark
that was hard to recognize unless one knew Clubs very well. It was
that spark that told the truth—that showed Clubs to be a man of
rare understanding.
Breeze smiled. "I
guess we are. Like we said before. It's Kelsier's fault. He turned us
into idiots who would stand at the front of a doomed army."
"That
bastard," Clubs said.
"Indeed,"
Breeze said.
Ash and snow
continued to fall. Men yelled in alarm.
And the gates burst
open.
"The eastern
gate has been breached, Master Terrisman!" Dockson's messenger
said, puffing slightly as he crouched beside Sazed. They both sat
beneath the wall-top battlements, listening to the koloss pound on
their own gate. The one that had fallen would be Zinc Gate, the one
on the easternmost side of Luthadel.
"Zinc Gate is
the most well defended," Sazed said quietly. "They will be
able to hold it, I think."
The messenger
nodded. Ash blew along the wall top, piling in the cracks and alcoves
in the stone, the black flakes adulterated by the occasional bit of
bone-white snow.
"Is there
anything you wish me to report to Lord Dockson?" the messenger
asked.
Sazed paused,
glancing along his wall's defenses. He'd climbed down from the
watchtower, joining the regular ranks of men. The soldiers had run
out of stones, though the archers were still working. He peeked over
the side of the wall and saw the koloss corpses piling up. However,
he also saw the splintered front of the gate. It's amazing they
can maintain such rage for so long, he thought, ducking back. The
creatures continued to howl and scream, like feral dogs.
He sat back against
the wet stone, shivering in the chill wind, his toes growing numb. He
tapped his brassmind, drawing out the heat he'd stored therein, and
his body suddenly flooded with a pleasant sensation of warmth.
"Tell Lord
Dockson that I fear for this gate's defenses," Sazed said
quietly. "The best men were stolen away to help with the eastern
gates, and I have little confidence in our leader. If Lord Dockson
could send someone else to be in charge, that would be for the best,
I think."
The messenger
paused.
"What?"
Sazed asked.
"Isn't that
why he sent you, Master Terrisman?"
Sazed frowned.
"Please tell him I have even less confidence in my own ability
to lead . . . or to fight . . . than I do in that of our commander."
The messenger
nodded and took off, scrambling down the steps toward his horse.
Sazed cringed as a rock hit the wall just above him. Chips flipped
over the merlon, scattering to the battlement in front of him. By
the Forgotten Gods . . . Sazed thought, wringing his hands. What
am I doing here?
He saw motion on
the wall beside him, and turned as the youthful soldier
captain—Captain Bedes—moved up to him, careful to keep
his head down. Tall, with thick hair that grew down around his eyes,
he was spindly even beneath his armor. The young man looked like he
should have been dancing at balls, not leading soldiers in battle.
"What did the
messenger say?" Bedes asked nervously.
"Zinc Gate has
fallen, my lord," Sazed replied.
The young captain
paled. "What . . . what should we do?"
"Why ask me,
my lord?" Sazed asked. "You are in command."
"Please,"
the man said, grabbing Sazed's arm. "I don't . . . I . . . "
"My lord,"
Sazed said sternly, forcing down his own nervousness. "You are a
nobleman, are you not?"
"Yes . . . "
"Then you are
accustomed to giving orders," Sazed said. "Give them now."
"Which
orders?"
"It doesn't
matter," Sazed said. "Let the men see that you are in
charge."
The young man
wavered, then yelped and ducked as a rock took one of the nearby
archers in the shoulder, throwing him back into the courtyard. The
men below scrambled out of the way of the corpse, and Sazed noticed
something odd. A group of people had gathered at the back of the
courtyard. Civilians—skaa—in ash-stained clothing.
"What are they
doing here?" Sazed asked. "They should be hiding, not
standing here to tempt the koloss once the creatures break through!"
"Once
they break through?" Captain Bedes asked.
Sazed ignored the
man. Civilians he could deal with. He was accustomed to being in
charge of a nobleman's servants.
"I will go
speak to them," Sazed said.
"Yes . . . "
Bedes said. "That sounds like a good idea."
Sazed made his way
down the steps, which were growing slick and wet with ashen slush,
then approached the group of people. There were even more of them
than he had assumed; they extended back into the street a short
distance. The hundred or so people stood huddled together, watching
the gates through the falling snow, looking cold, and Sazed felt a
little guilty for his brassmind's warmth.
Several of the
people bowed their heads as Sazed approached.
"Why are you
here?" Sazed asked. "Please, you must seek shelter. If your
homes are near the courtyard, then go hide near the middle of the
city. The koloss are likely to begin pillaging as soon as they finish
with the army, so the edges of the city are more dangerous."
None of the people
moved.
"Please!"
Sazed said. "You must go. If you stay, you will die!"
"We are not
here to die, Holy First Witness," said an elderly man at the
front. "We are here to watch the koloss fall."
"Fall?"
Sazed asked.
"The Lady Heir
will protect us," said another woman.
"The Lady Heir
has left the city!" Sazed said.
"Then we will
watch you, Holy First Witness," the man said, leaning with one
hand on a young boy's shoulder.
"Holy First
Witness?" Sazed said. "Why call me this name?"
"You are the
one who brought news of the Lord Ruler's death," the man said.
"You gave the Lady Heir the spear she used to slay our lord. You
were the witness to her actions."
Sazed shook his
head. "That may be true, but I am not worthy of reverence. I'm
not a holy man, I'm just a . . . "
"A witness,"
the old man said. "If the Heir is to join this fight, she will
appear near you."
"I . . . am
sorry . . . " Sazed said, flushing. I sent her away. I sent
your god to safety.
The people watched
him, their eyes reverent. It was wrong; they should not worship him.
He was simply an observer.
Except, he wasn't.
He had made himself part of this all. It was as Tindwyl had
indirectly warned him. Now that Sazed had participated in events, he
had become an object of worship himself.
"You should
not look at me like that," Sazed said.
"The Lady Heir
says the same thing," the old man said, smiling, breath puffing
in the cold air.
"That is
different," Sazed said. "She is . . . " He cut off,
turning as he heard cries from behind. The archers on the wall were
waving in alarm, and young Captain Bedes was rushing over to them.
What is—
A bestial blue
creature suddenly pulled itself up onto the wall, its skin streaked
and dripping with scarlet blood. It shoved aside a surprised archer,
then grabbed Captain Bedes by the neck and tossed him backward. The
boy disappeared, falling to the koloss below. Sazed heard the screams
even from a distance. A second koloss pulled itself up onto the wall,
then a third. Archers stumbled away in shock, dropping their weapons,
some shoving others off the ramparts in their haste.
The koloss are
jumping up, Sazed realized. Enough corpses must have piled
below. And yet, to jump so high . . .
More and more
creatures were pulling themselves onto the top of the wall. They were
the largest of the monsters, the ones over ten feet in height, but
that only made it easier for them to sweep the archers out of their
way. Men fell to the courtyard, and the pounding on the gates
redoubled.
"Go!"
Sazed said, waving at the people behind him. Some of them backed
away. Many stood firm.
Sazed turned
desperately back toward the gates. The wooden structures began to
crack, splinters spraying through the snowy, ash-laden air. The
soldiers backed away, postures frightened. Finally, with a snap, the
bar broke and the right gate burst open. A howling, bleeding, wild
mass of koloss began to scramble across the wet stones.
Soldiers dropped
their weapons and fled. Others remained, frozen with terror. Sazed
stood at their back, between the horrified soldiers and the mass of
skaa.
I am not a
warrior, he thought, hands shaking as he stared at the monsters.
It had been difficult enough to stay calm inside their camp. Watching
them scream—their massive swords out, their skin ripped and
bloodied as they fell upon the human soldiers—Sazed felt his
courage begin to fail.
But if I don't
do something, nobody will.
He tapped pewter.
His muscles grew.
He drew deeply upon his steelmind as he dashed forward, taking more
strength than he ever had before. He had spent years storing up
strength, rarely finding occasion to use it, and now he tapped that
reserve.
His body changed,
weak scholar's arms transforming into massive, bulky limbs. His chest
widened, bulging, and his muscles grew taut with power. Days spent
fragile and frail focused on this single moment. He shoved his way
through the ranks of soldiers, pulling his robe over his head as it
grew too restrictive, leaving himself wearing only a vestigial
loincloth.
The lead koloss
turned to find himself facing a creature nearly his own size. Despite
its rage, despite its inhumanness, the beast froze, surprise showing
in its beady red eyes.
Sazed punched the
monster. He hadn't practiced for war, and knew next to nothing about
combat. Yet, at that moment, his lack of skill didn't matter. The
creature's face folded around his fist, its skull cracking.
Sazed turned on
thick legs, looking back at the startled soldiers. Say something
brave! he told himself.
"Fight!"
Sazed bellowed, surprised at the sudden deepness and strength of his
voice.
And, startlingly,
they did.
Vin fell to her
knees, exhausted on the muddy, ash-soaked highway. Her fingers and
knees hit the slushy cold, but she didn't care. She simply knelt,
wheezing. She couldn't run any farther. Her pewter was gone. Her
lungs burned and her legs ached. She wanted to collapse and curl up,
coughing.
It's just the
pewter drag, she thought forcibly. She'd pushed her body hard,
but hadn't had to pay for it until now.
She coughed a
moment longer, groaning, then reached a dripping hand into her pocket
and pulled out her last two vials. They had a mixture of all eight
base metals, plus duralumin. Their pewter would keep her going for a
little bit longer . . . .
But not long
enough. She was still hours away from Luthadel. Even with pewter, she
wouldn't arrive until long after dark. She sighed, replacing her
vials, forcing herself to her feet.
What would I do
if I arrived? Vin thought. Why work so hard? Am I that eager
to fight again? To slaughter?
She knew that she
wouldn't arrive in time for the battle. In fact, the koloss had
probably attacked days ago. Still, this worried her. Her attack on
Cett's keep still flashed horrific images in her head. Things she had
done. Death she had caused.
And yet, something
felt different to her now. She had accepted her place as a knife. But
what was a knife, but another tool? It could be used for evil or for
good; it could kill, or it could protect.
That point was
moot, considering how weak she felt. It was hard to keep her legs
from trembling as she flared tin, clearing her head. She stood on the
imperial highway, a sodden, pockmarked roadway that looked—in
the softly falling snow—to twist onward for eternity. It ran
directly beside the imperial canal, which was a snakelike cut in the
land, wide but empty, extending beside the highway.
Before, with Elend,
this road had seemed bright and new. Now it looked dark and
depressing. The Well thumped, its pulsings growing more powerful with
each step she took back toward Luthadel. Yet, it wasn't happening
fast enough. Not fast enough for her to stop the koloss from taking
the city.
Not fast enough for
her friends.
I'm sorry . . .
she thought, teeth chattering as she pulled her cloak tight,
pewter no longer aiding her against the cold. I'm so sorry that I
failed you.
She saw a line of
smoke in the distance. She looked east, then west, but didn't see
much. The flat landscape was clouded in ashen snows.
A village,
thought her still-numb mind. One of many in the area. Luthadel
was by far the dominant city of the small dominance, but there were
others. Elend hadn't been able to keep the others completely free of
banditry, but they had fared far better than towns in other areas of
the Final Empire.
Vin stumbled
forward, pressing on through the slushy black puddles toward the
village. After about fifteen minutes of walking, she turned off the
main highway and made her way up a side road to the village. It was
small, even by skaa standards. Just a few hovels, along with a couple
of nicer structures.
Not a
plantation, Vin thought. This was once a way village—a
place for traveling noblemen to stop for the evening. The small
manor—which would have once been run by a minor noble
landlord—was dark. Two of the skaa hovels, however, had light
shining through the cracks. The gloomy weather must have convinced
the people to retire from their labors early.
Vin shivered,
walking up to one of the buildings, her tin-enhanced ears picking out
sounds of talking inside. She paused, listening. Children laughed,
and men spoke with gusto. She smelled what must have been the
beginnings of the evening meal—a simple vegetable stew.
Skaa . . .
laughing, she thought. A hovel like this one would have been a
place of fear and gloom during the days of the Lord Ruler. Happy skaa
had been considered underworked skaa.
We've meant
something. It's all meant something.
But was it worth
the deaths of her friends? The fall of Luthadel? Without Elend's
protection, even this little village would soon be taken by one
tyrant or another.
She drank in the
sounds of laughter. Kelsier hadn't given up. He had faced the Lord
Ruler himself, and his last words had been defiant. Even when his
plans had seemed hopeless, his own corpse lying in the street, he had
secretly been victorious.
I refuse to give
up, she thought, straightening. I refuse to accept their deaths until
I hold their corpses in my arms.
She raised a hand
and pounded on the door. Immediately, the sounds inside stopped. Vin
extinguished her tin as the door creaked open. Skaa, especially
country skaa, were skittish things. She'd probably have to—
"Oh, you poor
thing!" the woman exclaimed, pulling the door open the rest of
the way. "Come in out of that snow. What are you doing out
there!"
Vin hesitated. The
woman was dressed simply, but the clothing was well made to stave off
the winter. The firepit in the center of the room glowed with a
welcome warmth.
"Child?"
the woman asked. Behind, a stocky, bearded man rose to place a hand
on the woman's shoulder and study Vin.
"Pewter,"
Vin said quietly. "I need pewter."
The couple looked
at each other, frowning. They probably thought her mind addled. After
all, how must she look, hair drenched by the snow, clothing wet and
stuck with ash? She only wore simple riding clothing—trousers
and a nondescript cloak.
"Why don't you
come inside, child?" the man suggested. "Have something to
eat. Then we can talk about where you came from. Where are your
parents?"
Lord Ruler!
Vin thought with annoyance. I don't look that young, do I?
She threw a
Soothing on the couple, suppressing their concern and suspicion.
Then, she Rioted their willingness to help. She wasn't as good as
Breeze, but she wasn't unpracticed, either. The couple immediately
relaxed.
"I don't have
much time," Vin said. "Pewter."
"The lord had
some fine diningware in his home," the man said slowly. "But
we traded most of that for clothing and farming equipment. I think
there are a couple of goblets left. Master Cled—our elder—has
them in the other hovel . . . ."
"That might
work," Vin said. Though the metal probably won't be mixed
with Allomantic percentages in mind. It would probably have too
much silver or not enough tin, making the pewter work more weakly
than it would otherwise.
The couple frowned,
then looked at the others in the hovel.
Vin felt despair
crawl back into her chest. What was she thinking? Even if the pewter
were of the right alloy, it would take time to shave it and produce
enough for her to use in running. Pewter burned relatively quickly.
She'd need a lot of it. Preparing it could take almost as much time
as simply walking to Luthadel.
She turned, looking
south, through the dark, snowy sky. Even with pewter, it would take
hours more running. What she really needed was a spikeway—a
path marked by spikes driven in the ground that an Allomancer could
push against, throwing themselves through the air again and again. On
such an organized pathway, she'd once traveled from Luthadel to
Fellise—an hour's carriage ride—in under ten minutes.
But there was no
spikeway from this village to Luthadel; there weren't even ones along
the main canal routes. They were too hard to set up, too specific in
their usefulness, to be worth the bother of running them long
distances . . . .
Vin turned, causing
the skaa couple to jump. Perhaps they'd noticed the daggers in her
belt, or perhaps it was the look in her eyes, but they no longer
looked quite as friendly as they had before.
"Is that a
stable?" Vin said, nodding toward one of the dark buildings.
"Yes,"
the man said hesitantly. "But we have no horses. Only a couple
of goats and cows. Surely you don't want to—"
"Horseshoes,"
Vin said.
The man frowned.
"I need
horseshoes," Vin said. "A lot of them."
"Follow me,"
the man said, responding to her Soothing. He led her out into the
cold afternoon. Others followed behind them, and Vin noticed a couple
of men casually carrying cudgels. Perhaps it wasn't just Elend's
protection that had allowed these people to remain unmolested.
The stocky man
threw his weight against the stable door, pushing it to the side. He
pointed to a barrel inside. "They were getting rusty anyway,"
he said.
Vin walked up to
the barrel and took out a horseshoe, testing its weight. Then she
tossed it up in front of her and Pushed it with a solid flare of
steel. It shot away, arcing far through the air until it splashed
into a pool some hundred paces away.
Perfect, she
thought.
The skaa men were
staring. Vin reached into her pocket and pulled out one of her metal
vials, downing its contents and restoring her pewter. She didn't have
much of it left by pewter-dragging standards, but she had plenty of
steel and iron. Both burned slowly. She could Push and Pull on metals
for hours yet.
"Prepare your
village," she said, burning pewter, then counting out ten
horseshoes. "Luthadel is besieged—it might have fallen
already. If you get word that it has, I suggest you take your people
and move to Terris. Follow the imperial canal directly to the north."
"Who are you?"
the man asked.
"Nobody of
consequence."
He paused. "You're
her, aren't you?"
She didn't need to
ask what he meant. She simply dropped a horseshoe to the ground
behind her.
"Yes,"
she said quietly, then Pushed off of the shoe.
Immediately, she
shot into the air at an angle. As she began to fall, she dropped
another horseshoe. However, she waited until she was near the ground
to Push against this one; she needed to keep herself going more
forward than up.
She'd done all this
before. It wasn't that different from using coins to jump around. The
trick was going to be to keep herself moving. As she Pushed against
the second horseshoe—propelling herself into the snowy air
again—she reached behind herself and Pulled hard on the first
horseshoe.
The horseshoe
wasn't connected to anything, so it leaped into the air after her,
crossing the distance through the sky as Vin dropped a third shoe to
the ground. She let go of the first shoe, its momentum carrying it
through the air above her head. It fell to the ground as she Pushed
against the third shoe and Pulled on the second one, now far behind
her.
This is going to
be tough, Vin thought, frowning with concentration as she passed
over the first shoe and Pushed on it. However, she didn't get the
angle right, and she fell too far before Pushing. The horseshoe shot
out behind her, and didn't give her enough upward momentum to keep
her in the air. She hit the ground hard, but immediately Pulled the
shoe to herself and tried again.
The first few tries
were slow. The biggest problem was getting the angle down. She had to
hit the shoe just right, giving it enough downward force to keep it
in place on the ground, but enough forward motion to keep her moving
in the right direction. She had to land often that first hour, going
back to fetch horseshoes. However, she didn't have time for much
experimentation, and her determination insisted that she get the
process right.
Eventually, she had
three shoes working pretty well; it helped that the ground was wet,
and that her weight pressed the horseshoes down in the mud, giving
her a stronger anchor to use when Pushing herself forward. Soon she
was able to add a fourth shoe. The more frequently she Pushed—the
more horseshoes she had to Push against—the faster she would
go.
By the time she was
an hour out of the village, she added a fifth shoe. The result was a
continuous flow of flipping metal chunks. Vin Pulled, then Pushed,
then Pulled, then Pushed, moving with continual single-mindedness,
juggling herself through the air.
The ground raced
beneath her and horseshoes shot through the air above her. The wind
became a roar as she Pushed herself faster and faster, steering her
pathway to the south. She was a flurry of metal and motion—as
Kelsier had been, near the end, when he had killed the Inquisitor.
Except, her metal
wasn't meant to kill, but save. I might not arrive in time,
she thought, air rushing around her. But I'm not going to give up
halfway.
I have a young
nephew, one Rashek. He hates all of Khlennium with the passion of
envious youth. He hates Alendi even more acutely—though the two
have never met—for Rashek feels betrayed that one of our
oppressors should have been chosen as the Hero of Ages.





53
STRAFF WAS ACTUALLY
STARTING TO feel quite well as his army crested the last hill to
overlook Luthadel. He'd discreetly tried a few drugs from his
cabinet, and he was pretty certain he knew which one Amaranta had
given him: Black Frayn. A nasty drug indeed. He'd have to wean
himself from it slowly—but, for now, a few swallowed leaves
made him stronger and more alert than he'd ever been before. In fact,
he felt wonderful.
He was sure the
same couldn't be said for those in Luthadel. The koloss pooled around
the outer wall, still beating on several of the gates on the north
and east sides. Smoke rose from inside the city.
"Our scouts
say the creatures have broken through four of the city gates, my
lord," said Lord Janarle. "They breached the eastern gate
first, and there met with heavy resistance. The northeastern gate
fell next, then the northwestern gate, but the troops at both are
holding as well. The main breach happened in the north. The koloss
are apparently ravaging from that direction, burning and looting."
Straff nodded. The
northern gate, he thought. The one closest to Keep Venture.
"Do we attack,
my lord?" Janarle asked.
"How long ago
did the northern gate fall?"
"Perhaps an
hour ago, my lord."
Straff shook his
head leisurely. "Then, let us wait. The creatures worked quite
hard to break into the city—we should at least let them have a
little fun before we slaughter them."
"Are you sure,
my lord?"
Straff smiled.
"Once they lose their bloodlust in a few hours, they'll be tired
from all the fighting and calm down. That will be the best
time to strike. They'll be dispersed through the city and weakened
from the resistance. We can take them easily, that way."
Sazed gripped his
koloss opponent by the throat, forcing back its snarling, distorted
face. The beast's skin was stretched so tightly that it had split
down the center of the face, revealing bloody muscles above the
teeth, around the nose holes. It breathed with husky rage, spraying
droplets of spittle and blood across Sazed with each exhalation.
Strength!
Sazed thought, tapping his pewtermind for more power. His body became
so massive that he feared splitting his own skin. Fortunately, his
metalminds had been built to expand, braces and rings that didn't
connect on one side so that they could bend. Still, his bulk was
daunting. He probably wouldn't have been able to walk or maneuver
with such size—but it didn't matter, for the koloss had already
knocked him to the ground. All he needed was some extra power in his
grip. The creature clawed him in the arm with one hand, reaching
behind with the other, grasping its sword . . . .
Sazed's fingers
finally crushed the beast's thick neck. The creature tried to snarl,
but no breath came, and it instead thrashed about in frustration.
Sazed forced himself to his feet, then hurled the creature toward its
companions. With such unnatural strength, even a body eleven feet
tall felt light in his fingers. It smashed into a pile of attacking
koloss, forcing them backward.
Sazed stood,
gasping. I'm using my strength up so quickly, he thought,
releasing his pewtermind, his body deflating like a wineskin. He
couldn't continue tapping his reserves so much. He'd already used up
a good half of his strength—strength that had taken decades to
store. He still hadn't used his rings, but he had only a few minutes
of each attribute in those. They would wait for an emergency.
And that might
be what I'm facing now, he thought with dread. They still held
Steel Gate Square. Though koloss had broken through the gate, only a
few could pass through at once—and only the most massive seemed
able to jump up to the wall.
Sazed's little
troop of soldiers was sorely pressed, however. Bodies lay scattered
in the courtyard. The skaa faithful at the back had begun pulling the
wounded to safety. Sazed could hear them groaning behind him.
Koloss corpses
littered the square as well, and despite the carnage, Sazed couldn't
help but feel a sense of pride at how much it was costing the
creatures to force their way inside this portal. Luthadel was not
falling easily. Not at all.
The koloss seemed
rebuffed for the moment, and though several skirmishes still
continued in the courtyard, a new group of monsters was gathering
outside the gate.
Outside the
gate, Sazed thought, glancing to the side. The creatures had
cared to break open only one of the massive door gates, the right
one. There were corpses in the square—dozens, perhaps
hundreds—but the koloss themselves had cleared many out of the
way of the gate itself so that they could get into the courtyard.
Perhaps . . .
Sazed didn't have
time to think. He dashed forward, tapping his pewtermind again,
giving himself the strength of five men. He picked up the body of a
smaller koloss and threw it out the gate. The creatures outside
snarled, scattering. There were still hundreds waiting for the chance
to get in, but they tripped over the dead in their haste to get out
of the way of his projectile.
Sazed slipped on
blood as he grabbed a second body, throwing it to the side. "To
me!" he screamed, hoping that there were men who could hear, and
who could respond.
The koloss realized
what he was doing too late. He kicked another body out of the way,
then slammed his body against the open door and tapped his ironmind,
drawing forth the weight he had stored within it. Immediately, he
became far heavier, and that weight crashed against the gate,
slamming it closed.
Koloss rushed at
the doorway from the other side. Sazed scrambled up against the gate,
pushing corpses out of the way, forcing the massive portal closed all
the way. He tapped his ironmind further, draining its precious
reserve at an alarming rate. He became so heavy he felt his own
weight crushing him to the ground, and only his increased strength
managed to keep him on his feet. Frustrated koloss pounded on the
gate, but he held. Held them back, hands and chest pressed against
the rough wood, toes wedged back against uneven cobbles. With his
brassmind, he didn't even feel the cold, though ash, snow, and blood
mixed at his feet.
Men cried out. Some
died. Others slammed their own weight against the gate, and Sazed
spared a glance behind. The rest of his soldiers set up a perimeter,
protecting the gate from the koloss inside the city. The men fought
bravely, backs to the gate, only Sazed's power keeping the portal
from flying open.
And yet, they
fought. Sazed cried out in defiance, feet slipping, holding the gate
as his soldiers killed the remaining koloss in the courtyard. Then, a
group of them rushed in from the side, bearing with them a large
length of wood. Sazed didn't know where they'd gotten it, nor did he
care, as they slid it into place where the gate bar had been.
His weight ran out,
the ironmind empty. I should have stored more of that, over the
years, he thought with a sigh of exhaustion, sinking down before
the closed gate. It had seemed like a lot, until he'd been forced to
use it so often, using it to shove away koloss or the like.
I usually just
stored up weight as a side effect of making myself lighter. That
always seemed the more useful way to use iron.
He released pewter,
and felt his body deflating. Fortunately, stretching his body in such
a manner didn't leave his skin loose. He went back to his usual self,
only bearing a dreadful sense of exhaustion and a faint soreness. The
koloss continued to beat on the gate. Sazed opened tired eyes, lying
bare-chested in the falling snow and ash. His soldiers stood solemnly
before him.
So few, he
thought. Barely fifty remained of his original four hundred. The
square itself was red—as if painted—with bright koloss
blood, and it mixed with the darker human kind. Sickly blue lumps of
bodies lay alone or in heaps, interspersed with the twisted and torn
pieces that were often all that remained of human bodies once they
were hit by the brutal koloss swords.
The thumping
continued, like low drums, on the other side of the gate. The beating
picked up to a frenzied pace, the gate shaking, as the koloss grew
more frustrated. They could probably smell the blood, feel the flesh
that had so nearly been theirs.
"That board
won't hold for long," one of the soldiers said quietly, a bit of
ash floating down in front of his face. "And the hinges are
splintering. They're going to get through again."
Sazed stumbled to
his feet. "And we will fight again."
"My lord!"
a voice said. Sazed turned to see one of Dockson's messengers ride
around a pile of corpses. "Lord Dockson says that . . . "
He trailed off, noticing for the first time that Sazed's gate was
closed. "How . . . " the man began.
"Deliver your
message, young man," Sazed said tiredly.
"Lord Dockson
says you won't get any reinforcements," the man said, reining in
his horse. "Tin Gate has fallen, and—"
"Tin Gate?"
Sazed asked. Tindwyl! "When?"
"Over an hour
ago, my lord."
An hour? he
thought with shock. How long have we been fighting?
"You have to
hold here, my lord!" the young man said, turning and galloping
back the way he had come.
Sazed took a step
to the east. Tindwyl . . . .
The thumping on his
gate grew louder, and the board began to crack. The men ran for
something else to use to secure the gate, but Sazed could see that
the mountings that kept the board in place were beginning to pull
apart. Once they went, there would be no way to hold the gate closed.
Sazed closed his
eyes, feeling the weight of fatigue, reaching into his pewtermind. It
was nearly drained. After it was gone, he'd only have the tiny bit of
strength in one of the rings.
Yet, what else
could he do?
He heard the board
snap, and men yelled.
"Back!"
Clubs yelled. "Fall into the city!"
The remnants of
their army broke apart, pulling back from Zinc Gate. Breeze watched
with horror as more and more koloss spilled into the square,
overrunning the few men too weak or too wounded to retreat. The
creatures swept forward like a great blue tide, a tide with swords of
steel and eyes of red.
In the sky, the
sun—only faintly visible behind storm clouds—was a
bleeding scar that crept toward the horizon.
"Breeze,"
Clubs snapped, pulling him back. "Time to go."
Their horses had
long since bolted. Breeze stumbled after the general, trying not to
listen to the snarling from behind.
"Fall back to
the harrying positions!" Clubs called to those men who could
hear him. "First squad, shore up inside Keep Lekal! Lord Hammond
should be there by now, preparing the defenses! Squad two, with me to
Keep Hasting!"
Breeze continued
on, his mind as numb as his feet. He'd been virtually useless in the
battle. He'd tried to take away the men's fear, but his efforts had
seemed so inadequate. Like . . . holding a piece of paper up to the
sun to make shade.
Clubs held up a
hand, and the squad of two hundred men stopped. Breeze looked around.
The street was quiet in the falling ash and snow. Everything seemed .
. . dull. The sky was dim, the city's features softened by the
blanket of black-speckled snow. It seemed so strange to have fled the
horrific scene of scarlet and blue to find the city looking so lazy.
"Damn!"
Clubs snapped, pushing Breeze out of the way as a raging group of
koloss burst from a side street. Clubs's soldiers fell into a line,
but another group of koloss—the creatures that had just burst
through the gate—came up behind them.
Breeze stumbled,
falling in the snow. That other group . . . it came from the
north! The creatures have infiltrated the city this far already?
"Clubs!"
Breeze said, turning. "We—"
Breeze looked just
in time to see a massive koloss sword sheer through Clubs's upraised
arm, then continue on to hit the general in the ribs. Clubs grunted,
thrown to the side, his sword arm—weapon and all—flying
free. He stumbled on his bad leg, and the koloss brought his sword
down in a two-handed blow.
The dirty snow
finally got some color. A splash of red.
Breeze stared,
dumbfounded, at the remains of his friend's corpse. Then the koloss
turned toward Breeze, snarling.
The likelihood of
his own impending death hit, stirring him as even the cold snow
couldn't. Breeze scrambled back, sliding in the snow, instinctively
reaching out to try and Soothe the creature. Of course, nothing
happened. Breeze tried to get to his feet, and the koloss—along
with several others—began to bear down on him. At that moment,
however, another troop of soldiers fleeing the gate appeared from a
cross street, distracting the koloss.
Breeze did the only
thing that seemed natural. He crawled inside a building and hid.
"This is all
Kelsier's fault," Dockson muttered, making another notation on
his map. According to messengers, Ham had reached Keep Lekal. It
wouldn't last long.
The Venture grand
hall was a flurry of motion and chaos as panicked scribes ran this
way and that, finally realizing that koloss didn't care if a man were
skaa, scholar, nobleman, or merchant. The creatures just liked to
kill.
"He should
have seen this coming," Dockson continued. "He left us with
this mess, and then he just assumed that we'd find a way to fix it.
Well, I can't hide a city from its enemies—not like I hid a
crew. Just because we were excellent thieves doesn't mean we'd be any
good at running a kingdom!"
Nobody was
listening to him. His messengers had all fled, and his guards fought
at the keep gates. Each of the keeps had its own defenses, but
Clubs—rightly—had decided to use them only as a fallback
option. They weren't designed to repel a large-scale attack, and they
were too secluded from each other. Retreating to them only fractured
and isolated the human army.
"Our real
problem is follow-through," Dockson said, making a final
notation at Tin Gate, explaining what had happened there. He looked
over the map. He'd never expected Sazed's gate to be the last one to
hold.
"Follow-through,"
he continued. "We assumed we could do a better job than the
noblemen, but once we had the power, we put them back in charge. If
we'd killed the whole lot, perhaps then we could have started fresh.
Of course, that would have meant invading the other dominances—which
would have meant sending Vin to take care of the most important, most
problematic, noblemen. There would have been a slaughter like the
Final Empire had never seen. And, if we'd done that . . . "
He trailed off,
looking up as one of the massive, majestic stained-glass windows
shattered. The others began to explode as well, broken by thrown
rocks. A few large koloss jumped through the holes, landing on the
shard-strewn marble floor. Even broken, the windows were beautiful,
the spiked glass edges twinkling in the evening light. Through one of
them, Dockson could see that the storm was breaking, letting sunlight
through.
"If we'd done
that," Dockson said quietly, "we'd have been no better than
beasts."
Scribes screamed,
trying to flee as the koloss began the slaughter. Dockson stood
quietly, hearing noise behind—grunts, harsh breathing—as
koloss approached through the back hallways. He reached for the sword
on his table as men began to die.
He closed his eyes.
You know, Kell, he thought. I almost started to believe
that they were right, that you were watching over us. That you were
some sort of god.
He opened his eyes
and turned, pulling the sword from its sheath. Then he froze, staring
at the massive beast approaching from behind. So big!
Dockson gritted his
teeth, sending a final curse Kelsier's way, then charged, swinging.
The creature caught
his weapon in an indifferent hand, ignoring the cut it caused. Then,
it brought its own weapon down, and blackness followed.
"My lord,"
Janarle said. "The city has fallen. Look, you can see it
burning. The koloss have penetrated all but one of the four gates
under attack, and they run wild in the city. They aren't stopping to
pillage—they're just killing. Slaughtering. There aren't many
soldiers left to oppose them."
Straff sat quietly,
watching Luthadel burn. It seemed . . . a symbol to him. A symbol of
justice. He'd fled this city once, leaving it to the skaa vermin
inside, and when he'd come back to demand it be returned to him, the
people had resisted.
They had been
defiant. They had earned this.
"My lord,"
Janarle said. "The koloss army is weakened enough already. Their
numbers are hard to count, but the corpses they left behind indicate
that as much as a third of their force has fallen. We can take them!"
"No,"
Straff said, shaking his head. "Not yet."
"My lord?"
Janarle said.
"Let the
koloss have the damn city," Straff said quietly. "Let them
clear it out and burn the whole thing to the ground. Fires can't hurt
our atium—in fact, they'll probably make the metal easier to
find."
"I . . . "
Janarle seemed shocked. He didn't object further, but his eyes were
rebellious.
I'll have to
take care of him later, Straff thought. He'll rise against me
if he finds that Zane is gone.
That didn't matter
at the moment. The city had rejected him, and so it would die. He'd
build a better one in its place.
One dedicated to
Straff, not the Lord Ruler.
"Father!"
Allrianne said urgently.
Cett shook his
head. He sat on his horse, beside his daughter's horse, on a hill to
the west of Luthadel. He could see Straff's army, gathered to the
north, watching—as he watched—the death throes of a
doomed city.
"We have to
help!" Allrianne insisted.
"No,"
Cett said quietly, shrugging off the effects of her Raging his
emotions. He'd grown used to her manipulations long ago. "Our
help wouldn't matter now."
"We have to do
something!" Allrianne said, pulling his arm.
"No,"
Cett said more forcefully.
"But you came
back!" she said. "Why did we return, if not to help?"
"We will
help," Cett said quietly. "We'll help Straff take the city
when he wishes, then we'll submit to him and hope he doesn't kill
us."
Allrianne paled.
"That's it?" she hissed. "That's why we returned, so
that you can give our kingdom to that monster?"
"What else did
you expect?" Cett demanded. "You know me, Allrianne. You
know that this is the choice I have to make."
"I thought I
knew you," she snapped. "I thought you were a good man,
down deep."
Cett shook his
head. "The good men are all dead, Allrianne. They died inside
that city."
Sazed fought on. He
was no warrior; he didn't have honed instincts or training. He
calculated that he should have died hours before. And yet, somehow,
he managed to stay alive.
Perhaps it was
because the koloss didn't fight with skill, either. They were
blunt—like their giant, wedgelike swords—and they simply
threw themselves at their opponents with little thought of tactics.
That should have
been enough. Yet, Sazed held—and where he held, his few men
held with him. The koloss had rage on their side, but Sazed's men
could see the weak and elderly standing, waiting, just at the edge of
the square. The soldiers knew why they fought. This reminder seemed
enough to keep them going, even when they began to be surrounded, the
koloss working their way into the edges of the square.
Sazed knew, by now,
that no relief was going to come. He'd hoped, perhaps, that Straff
would decide to take the city, as Clubs had suggested. But it was too
late for that; night was approaching, the sun inching toward the
horizon.
The end is
finally here, Sazed thought as the man next to him was struck
down. Sazed slipped on blood, and the move saved him as the koloss
swung over his head.
Perhaps Tindwyl had
found a way to safety. Hopefully, Elend would deliver the things he
and she had studied. They were important, Sazed thought, even
if he didn't know why.
Sazed attacked,
swinging the sword he'd taken from a koloss. He enhanced his muscles
in a final burst as he swung, giving them strength right as the sword
met koloss flesh.
He hit. The
resistance, the wet sound of impact, the shock up his arm—these
were familiar to him now. Bright koloss blood sprayed across him, and
another of the monsters fell.
And Sazed's
strength was gone.
Pewter tapped
clean, the koloss sword was now heavy in his hands. He tried to swing
it at the next koloss in line, but the weapon slipped from his weak,
numb, tired fingers.
This koloss was a
big one. Nearing twelve feet tall, it was the largest of the monsters
Sazed had seen. Sazed tried to step away, but he stumbled over the
body of a recently killed soldier. As he fell, his men finally broke,
the last dozen scattering. They'd held well. Too well. Perhaps if
he'd let them retreat . . .
No, Sazed
thought, looking up at his death. I did well, I think. Better than
any mere scholar should have been able to.
He thought about
the rings on his fingers. They could, perhaps, give him a little bit
of an edge, let him run. Flee. Yet, he couldn't summon the
motivation. Why resist? Why had he resisted in the first place? He'd
known that they were doomed.
You're wrong
about me, Tindwyl, he thought. I do give up, sometimes. I gave
up on this city long ago.
The koloss loomed
over Sazed, who still lay half sprawled in the bloody slush, and
raised its sword. Over the creature's shoulder, Sazed could see the
red sun hanging just above the top of the wall. He focused on that,
rather than on the falling sword. He could see rays of sunlight, like
. . . shards of glass in the sky.
The sunlight seemed
to sparkle, twinkling, coming for him. As if the sun itself were
welcoming him. Reaching down to accept his spirit.
And so, I die .
. . .
A twinkling droplet
of light sparkled in the beam of sunlight, then hit the koloss
directly in the back of the skull. The creature grunted, stiffening,
dropping its sword. It collapsed to the side, and Sazed lay,
stupefied, on the ground for a moment. Then he looked up at the top
of the wall.
A small figure
stood silhouetted by the sun. Black before the red light, a cloak
flapped gently on her back. Sazed blinked. The bit of sparkling light
he'd seen . . . it had been a coin. The koloss before him was dead.
Vin had returned.
She jumped, leaping
as only an Allomancer could, to soar in a graceful arc above the
square. She landed directly in the midst of the koloss and spun.
Coins shot out like angry insects, cutting through blue flesh. The
creatures didn't drop as easily as humans would have, but the attack
got their attention. The koloss turned away from the fleeing soldiers
and defenseless townspeople.
The skaa at the
back of the square began to chant. It was a bizarre sound to hear in
the middle of a battle. Sazed sat up, ignoring his pains and
exhaustion as Vin jumped. The city gate suddenly lurched, its hinges
twisting. The koloss had already beaten on it so hard . . . .
The massive wooden
portal burst free from the wall, Pulled by Vin. Such power,
Sazed thought numbly. She must be Pulling on something behind
herself—but, that would mean that poor Vin is being yanked
between two weights as heavy as that gate.
And yet, she did
it, lifting the gate door with a heave, Pulling it toward herself.
The huge hardwood gate crashed through the koloss ranks, scattering
bodies. Vin twisted expertly in the air, Pulling herself to the side,
swinging the gate to the side as if it were tethered to her by a
chain.
Koloss flew in the
air, bones cracking, sprayed like splinters before the enormous
weapon. In a single sweep, Vin cleared the entire courtyard.
The gate dropped.
Vin landed amid a group of crushed bodies, silently kicking a
soldier's war staff up into her hands. The remaining koloss outside
the gate paused only briefly, then charged. Vin began to attack
swiftly, but precisely. Skulls cracked, koloss falling dead in the
slush as they tried to pass her. She spun, sweeping a few of them to
the ground, spraying ashen red slush across those running up behind.
I . . . I have
to do something, Sazed thought, shaking off his stupefaction. He
was still bare-chested, the cold ignored because of his
brassmind—which was nearly empty. Vin continued to fight,
felling koloss after koloss. Even her strength won't last forever.
She can't save the city.
Sazed forced
himself to his feet, then moved toward the back of the square. He
grabbed the old man at the front of the crowd of skaa, shaking the
man out of his chanting. "You were right," Sazed said. "She
returned."
"Yes, Holy
First Witness."
"She will be
able to give us some time, I think," Sazed said. "The
koloss have broken into the city. We need to gather what people we
can and escape."
The old man paused,
and for a moment Sazed thought he would object—that he would
claim Vin would protect them, would defeat the entire army. Then,
thankfully, he nodded.
"We'll run out
the northern gate," Sazed said urgently. "That is where the
koloss first entered the city, and so it is likely that they have
moved on from that area."
I hope,
Sazed thought, rushing off to raise the warning. The fallback
defensive positions were supposed to be the high noble keeps. Perhaps
they would find survivors there.
So, Breeze
thought, it turns out that I'm a coward.
It was not a
surprising revelation. He had always said that it was important for a
man to understand himself, and he had always been aware of his
selfishness. So, he was not at all shocked to find himself huddling
against the flaking bricks of an old skaa home, shutting his ears to
the screams just outside.
Where was the proud
man now? The careful diplomat, the Soother with his immaculate suits?
He was gone, leaving behind this quivering, useless mass. He tried
several times to burn brass, to Soothe the men fighting outside.
However, he couldn't accomplish this most simple of actions. He
couldn't even move.
Unless one counted
trembling as movement.
Fascinating,
Breeze thought, as if looking at himself from the outside, seeing the
pitiful creature in the ripped, bloodied suit. So this is what
happens to me, when the stress gets too strong? It's ironic, in a
way. I've spent a lifetime controlling the emotions of others. Now
I'm so afraid, I can't even function.
The fighting
continued outside. It was going on an awful long time. Shouldn't
those soldiers be dead?
"Breeze?"
He couldn't move to
see who it was. Sounds like Ham. That's funny. He should be dead,
too.
"Lord Ruler!"
Ham said, coming into Breeze's view. He wore a bloodied sling on one
arm. He fell urgently to Breeze's side. "Breeze, can you hear
me?"
"We saw him
duck in here, my lord," another voice said. A soldier? "Took
shelter from the fight. We could feel him Soothing us, though. Kept
us fighting, even when we should have given up. After Lord Cladent
died . . . "
I'm a coward.
Another figure
appeared. Sazed, looking concerned. "Breeze," Ham said,
kneeling. "My keep fell, and Sazed's gate is down. We haven't
heard anything from Dockson in over an hour, and we found Clubs's
body. Please. The koloss are destroying the city. We need to know
what to do."
Well, don't ask
me, Breeze said—or tried to say. He thought it came out as
a mumble.
"I can't carry
you, Breeze," Ham said. "My arm is nearly useless."
Well, that's all
right, Breeze mumbled. You see, my dear man, I don't think I'm
of much use anymore. You should move on. It's quite all right if you
just leave me here.
Ham looked up at
Sazed, helpless.
"Hurry, Lord
Hammond," Sazed said. "We can have the soldiers carry the
wounded. We will make our way to Keep Hasting. Perhaps we can find
sanctuary there. Or . . . perhaps the koloss will be distracted
enough to let us slip out of the city."
Distracted?
Breeze mumbled. Distracted by the killing of other people, you
mean. Well, it is somewhat comforting to know that we're all
cowards. Now, if I could just lie here for a little longer, I
might be able to fall asleep . . .
And forget all
of this.
Alendi will need
guides through the Terris Mountains. I have charged Rashek with
making certain that he and his trusted friends are chosen as those
guides.





54
VIN'S STAFF BROKE
AS SHE slammed it across a koloss face.
Not again,
she thought with frustration, spinning and ramming the broken shard
into another creature's chest. She turned and came face-to-face with
one of the big ones, a good five feet taller than she.
It thrust its sword
toward her. Vin jumped, and the sword collided with broken
cobblestones beneath her. She shot upward, not needing any coins to
carry herself up to eye level with the creature's twisted face.
They always looked
surprised. Even after watching her fight dozens of their companions,
they seemed shocked to see her dodge their blows. Their minds seemed
to equate size with power; a larger koloss always beat a smaller one.
A five-foot-tall human should have been no problem for a monster this
big.
Vin flared pewter
as she smashed her fist into the beast's head. The skull cracked
beneath her knuckles, and the beast fell backward as she dropped back
to the ground. Yet, as always, there was another to take its place.
She was getting
tired. No, she'd started the battle tired. She'd
pewter-dragged, then used a convoluted personal spikeway to carry
herself across an entire dominance. She was exhausted. Only the
pewter in her last metal vial was keeping her upright.
I should have
asked Sazed for one of his empty pewterminds! she thought.
Feruchemical and Allomantic metals were the same. She could have
burned that—though it would probably have been a bracer or a
bracelet. To large to swallow.
She ducked to the
side as another koloss attacked. Coins didn't stop these things, and
they all weighed too much for her to Push them away without an
anchor. Besides, her steel and iron reserves were extremely low.
She killed koloss
after koloss, buying time for Sazed and the people to get a good head
start. Something was different this time—different from when
she'd killed at Cett's palace. She felt good. It wasn't just because
she killed monsters.
It was because she
understood her purpose. And she agreed with it. She could
fight, could kill, if it meant defending those who could not
defend themselves. Kelsier might have been able to kill for shock or
retribution, but that wasn't good enough for Vin.
And she would never
let it be again.
That determination
fueled her attacks against the koloss. She used a stolen sword to cut
off the legs of one, then threw the weapon at another, Pushing on it
to impale the koloss in the chest. Then she Pulled on the sword of a
fallen soldier, yanking it into her hand. She ducked backward, but
nearly stumbled as she stepped on another body.
So tired,
she thought.
There were
dozens—perhaps even hundreds—of corpses in the courtyard.
In fact, a pile was forming beneath her. She climbed it, retreating
slightly as the creatures surrounded her again. They crawled over the
corpses of their fallen brethren, rage frothing in their blood-drop
eyes. Human soldiers would have given up, going to seek easier
fights. The koloss, however, seemed to multiply as she fought them,
others hearing the sounds of battle and coming to join in.
She swiped, pewter
aiding her strength as she cut off an arm from one koloss, then a leg
from another, before finally going for the head of a third. She
ducked and dodged, jumping, staying out of their reach, killing as
many as she could.
But as desperate as
her determination—as strong as her newfound resolve to
defend—she knew that she couldn't keep fighting, not like this.
She was only one person. She couldn't save Luthadel, not alone.
"Lord Penrod!"
Sazed yelled, standing at the gates to Keep Hasting. "You must
listen to me."
There was no
response. The soldiers at the top of the short keep wall were quiet,
though Sazed could sense their discomfort. They didn't like ignoring
him. In the distance, the battle still raged. Koloss screamed in the
night. Soon they would find their way to Sazed and Ham's growing band
of several thousand, who now huddled quietly outside Keep Hasting's
gate.
A haggard messenger
approached Sazed. He was the same one that Dockson had been sending
to Steel Gate. He'd lost his horse somewhere, and they'd found him
with a group of refugees in the Square of the Survivor.
"Lord
Terrisman," the messenger said quietly. "I . . . just got
back from the command post. Keep Venture has fallen . . . ."
"Lord
Dockson?"
The man shook his
head. "We found a few wounded scribes hiding outside the keep.
They saw him die. The koloss are still in the building, breaking
windows, rooting about . . . ."
Sazed turned back,
looking over the city. So much smoke billowed in the sky that it
seemed the mists had come already. He'd begun filling his scent
tinmind to keep the stench away.
The battle for the
city might be over, but now the true tragedy would begin. The koloss
in the city had finished killing soldiers. Now they would slaughter
the people. There were hundreds of thousands of them, and Sazed knew
the creatures would gleefully extend the devastation. No looting. Not
when there was killing to be done.
More screams
sounded in the night. They'd lost. Failed. And now, the city would
truly fall.
The mists can't
be far away, he thought, trying to give himself some hope.
Perhaps that will give us some cover.
Still, one image
stood out to him. Clubs, dead in the snow. The wooden disk Sazed had
given him earlier that same day tied to a loop around his neck.
It hadn't helped.
Sazed turned back
to Keep Hasting. "Lord Penrod," he said loudly. "We
are going to try and slip out of the city. I would welcome your
troops and your leadership. If you stay here, the koloss will attack
this keep and kill you."
Silence.
Sazed turned,
sighing as Ham—arm still in a sling—joined him. "We
have to go, Saze," Ham said quietly.
"You're
bloody, Terrisman."
Sazed turned.
Ferson Penrod stood on the top of his wall, looking down. He still
looked immaculate in his nobleman's suit. He even wore a hat against
the snow and ash. Sazed looked down at himself. He still wore only
his loincloth. He hadn't had time to worry about clothing,
particularly with his brassmind to keep him warm.
"I've never
seen a Terrisman fight," Penrod said.
"It is not a
common occurrence, my lord," Sazed replied.
Penrod looked up,
staring out over the city. "It's falling, Terrisman."
"That is why
we must go, my lord," Sazed said.
Penrod shook his
head. He still wore Elend's thin crown. "This is my city,
Terrisman. I will not abandon it."
"A noble
gesture, my lord," Sazed said. "But these with me are your
people. Will you abandon them in their flight northward?"
Penrod paused. Then
he just shook his head again. "There will be no flight
northward, Terrisman. Keep Hasting is among the tallest structures in
the city—from it, we can see what the koloss are doing. They
will not let you escape."
"They may turn
to pillaging," Sazed said. "Perhaps we can get by them and
escape."
"No,"
Penrod said, his voice echoing hauntingly across the snowy streets.
"My Tineye claims the creatures have already attacked the people
you sent to escape through the northern gate. Now the koloss have
turned this way. They're coming for us."
As cries began to
echo through the distant streets, coming closer, Sazed knew that
Penrod's words must be true. "Open your gates, Penrod!"
Sazed yelled. "Let the refugees in!" Save their lives
for a few more pitiful moments.
"There is no
room," Penrod said. "And there is no time. We are doomed."
"You must let
us in!" Sazed screamed.
"It is odd,"
Penrod said, voice growing softer. "By taking this throne from
the Venture boy, I saved his life—and I ended my own. I could
not save the city, Terrisman. My only consolation is that I doubt
Elend could have done so either."
He turned to go,
walking down somewhere beyond the wall.
"Penrod!"
Sazed yelled.
He did not
reappear. The sun was setting, the mists were appearing, and the
koloss were coming.
Vin cut down
another koloss, then jumped back, Pushing herself off of a fallen
sword. She shot away from the pack, breathing heavily, bleeding from
a couple of minor cuts. Her arm was growing numb; one of the
creatures had punched her there. She could kill—kill better
than anyone she knew. However, she couldn't fight forever.
She landed on a
rooftop, then stumbled, falling to kneel in a pile of snow. The
koloss called and howled behind her, and she knew they would come,
chasing her, hounding her. She'd killed hundreds of them, but what
was a few hundred when compared with an army of over twenty thousand?
What did you
expect? she thought to herself. Why keep fighting once you
knew Sazed was free? Did you think to stop them all? Kill every
koloss in the army?
Once, she'd stopped
Kelsier from rushing an army by himself. He had been a great man, but
still just one person. He couldn't have stopped an entire army—no
more than she could.
I have to find
the Well, she thought with determination, burning bronze, the
thumpings—which she'd been ignoring during the battle—becoming
loud to her ears.
And yet, that left
her with the same problem as before. She knew it was in the city now;
she could feel the thumpings all around her. Yet, they were so
powerful, so omnipresent, that she couldn't sense a direction from
them.
Besides, what proof
did she have that finding the Well would even help? If Sazed had lied
about the location—had gone so far as to draw up a fake
map—then what else had he lied about? The power might stop the
mists, but what good would that do for Luthadel, burning and dying?
She knelt in
frustration, pounding the top of the roof with her fists. She had
proven too weak. What good was it to return—what good was it to
decide to protect—if she couldn't do anything to help?
She knelt for a few
moments, breathing in gasps. Finally, she forced herself to her feet
and jumped into the air, throwing down a coin. Her metals were nearly
gone. She barely had enough steel to carry her through a few jumps.
She ended up slowing near Kredik Shaw, the Hill of a Thousand Spires.
She caught one of the spikes at the top of the palace, spinning in
the night, looking out over the darkening city.
It was burning.
Kredik Shaw itself
was silent, quiet, left alone by looters of both races. Yet, all
around her, Vin saw light in the darkness. The mists glowed with a
haunting light.
It's like . . .
like that day two years ago, she thought. The night of the
skaa rebellion. Except, on that day, the firelight had come from
the torches of the rebels as they marched on the palace. This night,
a revolution of a different type was occurring. She could hear it.
She had her tin burning, and she forced herself to flare it, opening
her ears. She heard the screams. The death. The koloss hadn't
finished their killing work by destroying the army. Not by far.
They had only just
begun.
The koloss are
killing them all, she thought, shivering as the fires burned
before her. Elend's people, the ones he left behind because of me.
They're dying.
I am his knife.
Their knife. Kelsier trusted me with them. I should be able to do
something . . . .
She dropped toward
the ground, skidding off an angled rooftop, landing in the palace
courtyard. Mists gathered around her. The air was thick. And not just
with ash and snow; she could smell death in its breezes, hear screams
in its whispers.
Her pewter ran out.
She slumped to the
ground, a wave of exhaustion hitting her so hard that everything else
seemed inconsequential. She suddenly knew she shouldn't have relied
on the pewter so much. Shouldn't have pushed herself so hard. But, it
had seemed like the only way.
She felt herself
begin to slip into unconsciousness.
But people were
screaming. She could hear them—had heard them before. Elend's
city . . . Elend's people . . . dying. Her friends were out there
somewhere. Friends that Kelsier had trusted her to protect.
She gritted her
teeth, shoving aside the exhaustion for a moment longer, struggling
up to her feet. She looked through the mists, toward the phantom
sounds of terrified people. She began to dash toward them.
She couldn't jump;
she was out of steel. She couldn't even run very fast, but as she
forced her body to move, it responded better and better, fighting off
the dull numbness that she'd earned from relying on pewter so long.
She burst out of an
alleyway, skidding in the snow, and found a small group of people
running before a koloss raiding party. There were six of the beasts,
small ones, but still dangerous. Even as Vin watched, one of the
creatures cut down an elderly man, slicing him nearly in two. Another
picked up a small girl, slamming her against the side of a building.
Vin dashed forward,
past the fleeing skaa, whipping out her daggers. She still felt
exhausted, but adrenaline helped her somewhat. She had to keep
moving. Keep going. To stop was to die.
Several of the
beasts turned toward her, eager to fight. One swung for her, and Vin
let herself slide in the slush—slipping closer to him—before
cutting the back of his leg. He howled in pain as her knife got
caught in his baggy skin. She managed to yank it free as a second
creature swung.
I feel so slow!
she thought with frustration, barely sliding to her feet before
backing away from the creature's reach. His sword sprayed chill water
across her, and she jumped forward, planting a dagger in the
creature's eye.
Suddenly thankful
for the times Ham had made her practice without Allomancy, she caught
the side of a building to steady herself in the slush. Then she threw
herself forward, shouldering the koloss with the wounded eye—he
was clawing at the dagger and yelling—into his companions. The
koloss with the young girl turned, shocked, as Vin rammed her other
dagger into his back. He didn't drop, but he did let go of the child.
Lord Ruler,
these things are tough! she thought, cloak whipping as she
grabbed the child and dashed away. Especially when you're not
tough yourself. I need some more metals.
The girl in Vin's
arms cringed as a koloss howl sounded, and Vin spun, flaring her tin
to keep herself from falling unconscious from her fatigue. The
creatures weren't following, however—they were arguing over a
bit of clothing the dead man had been wearing. The howl sounded
again, and this time, Vin realized, it had come from another
direction.
People began to
scream again. Vin looked up, only to find those she'd just rescued
facing down an even larger group of koloss.
"No!" Vin
said, raising a hand. But, they'd run far while she'd been fighting.
She wouldn't even have been able to see them, save for her tin. As it
was, she was able to see painfully well as the creatures began to lay
into the small group with their thick-bladed swords.
"No!" Vin
screamed again, the deaths startling her, shocking her, standing as a
reminder of all the deaths she'd been unable to prevent.
"No. No! No!"
Pewter, gone.
Steel, gone. Iron, gone. She had nothing.
Or . . . she had
one thing. Not even pausing to think on what prompted her to use it,
she threw a duralumin-enhanced Soothing at the beasts.
It was as if her
mind slammed into Something. And then, that Something shattered. Vin
skidded to a halt, shocked, child still in her arms as the koloss
stopped, frozen in their horrific act of slaughter.
What did I just
do? she thought, tracing through her muddled mind, trying to
connect why she had reacted as she had. Was it because she had been
frustrated?
No. She knew that
the Lord Ruler had built the Inquisitors with a weakness: Remove a
particular spike from their back, and they'd die. He had also built
the kandra with a weakness. The koloss had to have a weakness, too.
TenSoon called
the koloss . . . his cousins, she thought.
She stood upright,
the dark street suddenly quiet save for the whimpering skaa. The
koloss waited, and she could feel herself in their minds. As if they
were an extension of her own body, the same thing she had felt when
she'd taken control of TenSoon's body.
Cousins indeed. The
Lord Ruler had built the koloss with a weakness—the same
weakness as the kandra. He had given himself a way to keep
them in check.
And suddenly she
understood how he'd controlled them all those long years.
Sazed stood at the
head of his large band of refugees, snow and ash—the two now
indistinguishable in the misty darkness—falling around him. Ham
sat to one side, looking drowsy. He'd lost too much blood; a man
without pewter would have died by now. Someone had given Sazed a
cloak, but he had used it to wrap the comatose Breeze. Even though be
barely tapped his brassmind for warmth, Sazed himself wasn't cold.
Maybe he was just
getting too numb to care.
He held two hands
up before him, forming fists, ten rings sparkling against the light
of the group's single lantern. Koloss approached from the dark
alleyways, their forms huddled shadows in the night.
Sazed's soldiers
backed away. There was little hope left in them. Sazed alone stood in
the quiet snow, a spindly, bald scholar, nearly naked. He, the one
who preached the end. He, who should have had the most faith of all.
Ten rings. A few
minutes of power. A few minutes of life.
He waited as the
koloss gathered. The beasts grew strangely silent in the night. They
stopped approaching. They stood still, a line of dark, moundlike
silhouettes in the night.
Why don't they
attack! Sazed thought, frustrated.
A child whimpered.
Then, the koloss began to move again. Sazed tensed, but the creatures
didn't walk forward. They split, and a quiet figure walked through
the center of them.
"Lady Vin?"
Sazed asked. He still hadn't had a chance to speak with her since
she'd saved him at the gate. She looked exhausted.
"Sazed,"
she said tiredly. "You lied to me about the Well of Ascension."
"Yes, Lady
Vin," he said.
"That isn't
important now," she said. "Why are you standing naked
outside of the keep's walls?"
"I . . . "
He looked up at the koloss. "Lady Vin, I—"
"Penrod!"
Vin shouted suddenly. "Is that you up there?"
The king appeared.
He looked as confused as Sazed felt.
"Open your
gates!" Vin yelled.
"Are you mad?"
Penrod yelled back.
"I'm not
sure," Vin said. She turned, and a group of koloss moved
forward, walking quietly as if commanded. The largest one picked Vin
up, holding her up high, until she was nearly level with the top of
the keep's low wall. Several guards atop the wall shied away from
her.
"I'm tired,
Penrod," Vin said. Sazed had to tap his hearing tinmind to
listen in on her words.
"We're all
tired, child," Penrod said.
"I'm
particularly tired," Vin said. "I'm tired of the games. I'm
tired of people dying because of arguments between their leaders. I'm
tired of good men being taken advantage of."
Penrod nodded
quietly.
"I want you to
gather our remaining soldiers," Vin said, turning to look over
the city. "How many do you have in there?"
"About two
hundred," he said.
Vin nodded. "The
city is not lost—the koloss have fought against the soldiers,
but haven't had much time to turn on the population yet. I want you
to send out your soldiers to find any groups of koloss that are
pillaging or killing. Protect the people, but don't attack the koloss
if you can help it. Send a messenger for me instead."
Remembering
Penrod's bullheadedness earlier, Sazed thought the man might object.
He didn't. He just nodded.
"What do we do
then?" Penrod asked.
"I'll take
care of the koloss," Vin said. "We'll go reclaim Keep
Venture first—I'm going to need more metals, and there are
plenty stored there. Once the city is secure, I want you and your
soldiers to put out those fires. It shouldn't be too hard; there
aren't a lot of buildings left that can burn."
"Very well,"
Penrod said, turning to call out his orders.
Sazed watched in
silence as the massive koloss lowered Vin to the ground. It stood
quietly, as if it were a monster hewn of stone, and not a breathing,
bleeding, living creature.
"Sazed,"
Vin said softly. He could sense the fatigue in her voice.
"Lady Vin,"
Sazed said. To the side, Ham finally shook himself out of his stupor,
looking up in shock as he noticed Vin and the koloss.
Vin continued to
look at Sazed, studying him. Sazed had trouble meeting her eyes. But,
she was right. They could talk about his betrayal later. There were
other, more important tasks that had to be accomplished. "I
realize you probably have work for me to do," Sazed said,
breaking the silence. "But, might I instead be excused? There is
. . . a task I wish to perform."
"Of course,
Sazed," Vin said. "But first, tell me. Do you know if any
of the others survived?"
"Clubs and
Dockson are dead, my lady," Sazed said. "I have not seen
their bodies, but the reports were from reliable sources. You can see
that Lord Hammond is here, with us, though he has suffered a very bad
wound."
"Breeze?"
she asked.
Sazed nodded to the
lump that lay huddled beside the wall. "He lives, thankfully.
His mind, however, appears to be reacting poorly to the horrors he
saw. It could simply be a form of shock. Or . . . it could be
something more lasting."
Vin nodded, turning
to Ham. "Ham. I need pewter."
He nodded dully,
pulling out a vial with his good hand. He tossed it to her. Vin
downed it, and immediately her fatigue seemed to lessen. She stood up
straighter, her eyes becoming more alert.
That can't be
healthy, Sazed thought with worry. How much of that has she
been burning?
Step more
energetic, she turned to walk toward her koloss.
"Lady Vin?"
Sazed asked, causing her to turn around. "There is still an army
out there."
"Oh, I know,"
Vin said, turning to take one of the large, wedge like koloss swords
from its owner. It was actually a few inches taller than she was.
"I am well
aware of Straff's intentions," she said, hefting the sword up
onto her shoulder. Then she turned in to the snow and mist, walking
toward Keep Venture, her strange koloss guards tromping after her.
It took Sazed well
into the night to complete his self-appointed task. He found corpse
after corpse in the frigid night, many of them iced over. The snow
had stopped falling, and the wind had picked up, hardening the slush
to slick ice. He had to break some of the corpses free to turn them
over and inspect their faces.
Without his
brassmind to provide heat, he could never have performed his grisly
job. Even so, he had found himself some warmer clothing—a
simple brown robe and a set of boots. He continued working through
the night, the wind swirling flakes of snow and ice around him. He
started at the gate, of course. That was where the most corpses were.
However, he eventually had to move into alleyways and thoroughfares.
He found her body
sometime near morning.
The city had
stopped burning. The only light he had was his lantern, but it was
enough to reveal the strip of fluttering cloth in a snowbank. At
first, Sazed thought it was just another bloodied bandage that had
failed in its purpose. Then he saw a glimmer of orange and yellow,
and he moved over—he no longer had the strength to rush—and
reached into the snow.
Tindwyl's body
cracked slightly as he rolled it out. The blood on her side was
frozen, of course, and her eyes were iced open. Judging from the
direction of her flight, she had been leading her soldiers to Keep
Venture.
Oh, Tindwyl,
he thought, reaching down to touch her face. It was still soft, but
dreadfully cold. After years of being abused by the Breeders, after
surviving so much, she had found this. Death in a city where she
hadn't belonged, with a man—no, a half man—who did
not deserve her.
He released his
brassmind, and let the night's cold wash over him. He didn't want to
feel warm at the moment. His lantern flickered uncertainly,
illuminating the street, shadowing the icy corpse. There, in that
frozen alley of Luthadel, looking down at the corpse of the woman he
loved, Sazed realized something.
He didn't know what
to do.
He tried to think
of something proper to say—something proper to think—but
suddenly, all of his religious knowledge seemed hollow. What was the
use in giving her a burial? What was the value in speaking the
prayers of a long-dead god? What good was he? The religion of
Dadradah hadn't helped Clubs; the Survivor hadn't come to rescue the
thousands of soldiers who had died. What was the point?
None of Sazed's
knowledge gave him comfort. He accepted the religions he
knew—believed in their value—but that didn't give him
what he needed. They didn't assure him that Tindwyl's spirit still
lived. Instead, they made him question. If so many people believed so
many different things, how could any one of them—or, even,
anything at all—actually be true?
The skaa called
Sazed holy, but at that moment he realized that he was the most
profane of men. He was a creature who knew three hundred religions,
yet had faith in none of them.
So, when his tears
fell—and nearly began to freeze to his face—they gave him
as little comfort as his religions. He moaned, leaning over the
frozen corpse.
My life, he
thought, has been a sham.
Rashek is to try
and lead Alendi in the wrong direction, to discourage him, or
otherwise foil his quest. Alendi doesn't know that he has been
deceived, that we've all been deceived, and he will not listen to me
now.





55
STRAFF WOKE IN THE
COLD morning and immediately reached for a leaf of Black Frayn. He
was beginning to see the benefits of his addiction. It woke him
quickly and easily, making his body feel warm despite the early hour.
When he might have once taken an hour to get ready, he was up in
minutes, dressed, prepared for the day.
And glorious that
day would be.
Janarle met him
outside his tent, and the two walked through the bustling camp.
Straff's boots cracked on half ice, half snow as he made his way to
his horse.
"The fires are
out, my lord," Janarle explained. "Probably due to the
snows. The koloss probably finished their rampaging and took shelter
from the cold. Our scouts are afraid to get too close, but they say
the city is like a graveyard. Quiet and empty, save for the bodies."
"Maybe they
actually killed each other off," Straff said cheerfully,
climbing into his saddle, breath puffing in the crisp morning air.
Around him, the army was forming up. Fifty thousand soldiers, eager
at the prospect of taking the city. Not only was there plundering to
be done, but moving into Luthadel would mean roofs and walls for all
of them.
"Perhaps,"
Janarle said, mounting.
Wouldn't that be
convenient, Straff thought with a smile. All of my enemies
dead, the city and its riches mine, and no skaa to worry about.
"My lord!"
someone cried.
Straff looked up.
The field between his camp and Luthadel was colored gray and white,
the snow stained by ash. And gathering on the other side of that
field were koloss.
"Looks like
they are alive after all, my lord," Janarle said.
"Indeed,"
Straff said, frowning. There were still a lot of the creatures. They
piled out of the western gate, not attacking immediately, instead
gathering in a large body.
"Scout counts
say there are fewer of them than there were," Janarle said after
a short time. "Perhaps two-thirds their original number, maybe a
bit fewer. But, they are koloss . . . ."
"But they're
abandoning their fortifications," Straff said, smiling, Black
Frayn warming his blood, making him feel like he was burning metals.
"And they're coming to us. Let them charge. This should be over
quickly."
"Yes, my
lord," Janarle said, sounding a little less certain. He frowned,
then, pointing toward the southern section of the city. "My . .
. lord?"
"What now?"
"Soldiers, my
lord," Janarle said. "Human ones. Looks to be several
thousand of them."
Straff frowned.
"They should all be dead!"
The koloss charged.
Straff's horse shuffled slightly as the blue monsters ran across the
gray field, the human troops falling into more organized ranks
behind.
"Archers!"
Janarle shouted. "Prepare first volley!"
Perhaps I
shouldn't be at the front, Straff thought suddenly. He turned his
horse, then noticed something. An arrow suddenly shot from the midst
of the charging koloss.
But, koloss didn't
use bows. Besides, the monsters were still far away, and that object
was far too big to be an arrow anyway. A rock, perhaps? It seemed
larger than . . .
It began to fall
down toward Straff's army. Straff stared into the sky, riveted by the
strange object. It grew more distinct as it fell. It wasn't an arrow,
nor was it a rock.
It was a person—a
person with a flapping mistcloak.
"No!"
Straff yelled. She's supposed to be gone!
Vin screamed down
from her duralumin-fueled Steeljump, massive koloss sword light in
her hands. She hit Straff directly in the head with the sword, then
continued on downward, slamming into the ground, throwing up snow and
frozen dirt with the power of her impact.
The horse fell into
two pieces, front and back. What remained of the former king slid to
the ground with the equine corpse. She looked at the remnants, smiled
grimly, and bid Straff farewell.
Elend had, after
all, warned him what would happen if he attacked the city.
Straff's generals
and attendants stood around her in a stunned circle. Behind her, the
koloss army barreled forward, confusion in Straff's ranks making the
archer volleys ragged and less effective.
Vin kept a tight
hold on her sword, then Pushed outward with a duralumin-enhanced
Steelpush. Riders were thrown, their beasts tripped by their shoes,
and soldiers sprayed backward from her in a circle of several dozen
yards. Men screamed.
She downed another
vial, restoring both steel and pewter. Then she jumped up, seeking
out generals and other officers to attack. As she moved, her koloss
troops hit the front ranks of Straff's army, and the real carnage
began.
"What are they
doing?" Cett asked, hurriedly throwing on his cloak as he was
placed and tied into his saddle.
"Attacking,
apparently," said Bahmen, one of his aides. "Look! They're
working with the koloss."
Cett frowned, doing
up his cloak clasp. "A treaty?"
"With koloss?"
Bahmen asked.
Cett shrugged.
"Who's going to win?"
"No way to
tell, my lord," the man said. "Koloss are—"
"What is
this!" Allrianne demanded, riding up the snowy incline,
accompanied by a couple of abashed guards. Cett had, of course,
ordered them to keep her in the camp—but he had also, of
course, expected that she'd get past them eventually.
At least I can
count on her to be slowed down by getting ready in the morning,
he thought with amusement. She wore one of her dresses, immaculately
arranged, her hair done. If a building were burning down, Allrianne
would still pause to do her makeup before escaping.
"Looks like
the battle has begun," Cett said, nodding toward the fighting.
"Outside
the city?" Allrianne asked, riding up next to him. Then she
brightened. "They're attacking Straff's position!"
"Yes,"
Cett said. "And that leaves the city—"
"We have to
help them, Father!"
Cett rolled his
eyes. "You know we're going to do nothing of the sort. We'll see
who wins. If they're weak enough—which I hope they will
be—we'll attack them. I didn't bring all of my forces back with
me, but maybe . . . "
He trailed off as
he noticed the look in Allrianne's eyes. He opened his mouth to
speak, but before he could do so, she kicked her horse into motion.
Her guards cursed,
dashing forward—too late—to try and grab her reins. Cett
sat, stunned. This was a little insane, even for her. She wouldn't
dare . . .
She galloped down
the hill toward the battle. Then she paused, as he had expected. She
turned, looking back at him.
"If you want
to protect me, Father," she yelled, "you'd better charge!"
With that, she
turned and started galloping again, her horse throwing up puffs of
snow.
Cett didn't move.
"My lord,"
Bahmen said. "Those forces look almost evenly matched. Fifty
thousand men against a force of some twelve thousand koloss and about
five thousand men. If we were to add our strength to either side . .
. "
Damn fool girl!
he thought, watching Allrianne gallop away.
"My lord?"
Bahmen asked.
Why did I come
to Luthadel in the first place? Was it because I really thought I
could take the city? Without Allomancers, with my homeland in revolt?
Or, was it because I was looking for something? A confirmation of the
stories. A power like I saw on that night, when the Heir almost
killed me.
How exactly did
they get the koloss to fight with them, anyway?
"Gather our
forces!" Cett commanded. "We're marching to the defense of
Luthadel. And somebody send riders after that fool daughter of mine!"
Sazed rode quietly,
his horse moving slowly in the snow. Ahead of him, the battle raged,
but he was far enough behind it to be out of danger. He'd left the
city behind, where Luthadel's surviving women and elderly watched
from the walls. Vin had saved them from the koloss. The real miracle
would be to see if she could save them from the other two armies.
Sazed didn't ride
into the fight. His metalminds were mostly empty, and his body was
nearly as tired as his mind. He simply brought his horse to a halt,
its breath puffing in the cold as he sat alone on the snowy plain.
He didn't know how
to deal with Tindwyl's death. He felt . . . hollow. He wished that he
could just stop feeling. He wished that he could go back and defend
her gate, instead of his own. Why hadn't he gone in search of her
when he'd heard of the northern gate's fall? She'd still been alive
then. He might have been able to protect her . . .
Why did he even
care anymore? Why bother?
But, the ones
who had faith were right, he thought. Vin came back to defend
the city. I lost hope, but they never did.
He started his
horse forward again. The sounds of battle came in the distance. He
tried to focus on anything but Tindwyl, but his thoughts kept
returning to things he had studied with her. The facts and stories
became more precious, for they were a link to her. A painful link,
but one he couldn't bear to discard.
The Hero of Ages
was not simply to be a warrior, he thought, still riding slowly
toward the battlefield. He was a person who united others, who
brought them together. A leader.
He knew that Vin
thought she was the Hero. But Tindwyl was right: it was too much of a
coincidence. And, he wasn't even certain what he believed anymore. If
anything.
The Hero of Ages
was removed from the Terris people, he thought, watching the
koloss attack. He was not royalty himself, but came to it
eventually.
Sazed pulled his
horse up, pausing in the center of the open, empty field. Arrows
stuck from the snow around him, and the ground was thoroughly
trampled. In the distance, he heard a drum. He turned, watching as an
army of men marched over a rise to the west. They flew Cett's banner.
He commanded the
forces of the world. Kings rode to his aid.
Cett's forces
joined the battle against Straff. There was a crash of metal against
metal, bodies grunting, as a new front came under attack. Sazed sat
on the field between the city and the armies. Vin's forces were still
outnumbered, but as Sazed watched, Straff's army began to pull back.
It broke into pieces, its members fighting without direction. Their
movements bespoke terror.
She's killing
their generals, he thought.
Cett was a clever
man. He himself rode to battle, but he stayed near the back of his
ranks—his infirmities requiring him to remain tied into his
saddle and making it difficult for him to fight. Still, by joining
the battle, he ensured that Vin would not turn her koloss on him.
For there was
really no doubt in Sazed's mind who would win this conflict. Indeed,
before even an hour had passed, Straff's troops began to surrender in
large groups. The sounds of battle died down, and Sazed kicked his
horse forward.
Holy First
Witness, he thought. I don't know that I believe that. But,
either way, I should be there for what happens next.
The koloss stopped
fighting, standing silently. They parted for Sazed as he rode up
through their ranks. Eventually, he found Vin standing, bloodied, her
massive koloss sword held on one shoulder. Some koloss pulled a man
forward—a lord in rich clothing and a silvery breastplate. They
dropped him before Vin.
From behind, Penrod
approached with an honor guard, led by a koloss. Nobody spoke.
Eventually, the koloss parted again, and this time a suspicious Cett
rode forward, surrounded by a large group of soldiers and led by a
single koloss.
Cett eyed Vin, then
scratched his chin. "Not much of a battle," he said.
"Straff's
soldiers were afraid," Vin said. "They're cold, and they
have no desire to fight koloss."
"And their
leaders?" Cett asked.
"I killed
them," Vin said. "Except this one. Your name?"
"Lord
Janarle," said Straff's man. His leg appeared broken, and koloss
held him by either arm, supporting him.
"Straff is
dead," Vin said. "You control this army now."
The nobleman bowed
his head. "No, I don't. You do."
Vin nodded. "On
your knees," she said.
The koloss dropped
Janarle. He grunted in pain, but then bowed forward. "I swear my
army to you," he whispered.
"No," Vin
said sharply. "Not to me—to the rightful heir of House
Venture. He is your lord now."
Janarle paused.
"Very well," he said. "Whatever you wish. I swear
loyalty to Straff's son, Elend Venture."
The separate groups
stood in the cold. Sazed turned as Vin did, looking at Penrod. Vin
pointed at the ground. Penrod quietly dismounted, then bowed himself
to the ground.
"I swear as
well," he said. "I give my loyalty to Elend Venture."
Vin turned to Lord
Cett.
"You expect
this of me?" the bearded man said, amused.
"Yes,"
Vin said quietly.
"And if I
refuse?" Cett asked.
"Then I'll
kill you," Vin said quietly. "You brought armies to attack
my city. You threatened my people. I won't slaughter your soldiers,
make them pay for what you did, but I will kill you, Cett."
Silence. Sazed
turned, looking back at the lines of immobile koloss, standing in the
bloodied snow.
"That is a
threat, you know," Cett said. "Your own Elend would never
stand for such a thing."
"He's not
here," Vin said.
"And what do
you think he'd say?" Cett asked. "He'd tell me not to give
in to such a demand—the honorable Elend Venture would never
give in simply because someone threatened his life."
"You're not
the man that Elend is," Vin said. "And you know it."
Cett paused, then
smiled. "No. No, I'm not." He turned to his aides. "Help
me down."
Vin watched quietly
as the guards undid Cett's legs, then lifted him down to the snowy
ground. He bowed. "Very well, then. I swear myself to Elend
Venture. He's welcome to my kingdom . . . assuming he can take it
back from that damn obligator who now controls it."
Vin nodded, turning
to Sazed. "I need your help, Sazed."
"Whatever you
command, Mistress," Sazed said quietly.
Vin paused. "Please
don't call me that."
"As you wish,"
Sazed said.
"You're the
only one here I trust, Sazed," Vin said, ignoring the three
kneeling men. "With Ham wounded and Breeze . . . "
"I will do my
best," Sazed said, bowing his head. "What is it you want me
to do?"
"Secure
Luthadel," Vin said. "Make certain the people are
sheltered, and send for supplies from Straff's storehouses. Get these
armies so that they won't kill each other, the send a squad to fetch
Elend. He'll be coming south on the canal highway."
Sazed nodded, and
Vin turned to the three kneeling kings. "Sazed is my second. You
will obey him as you would Elend or myself."
They each nodded in
turn.
"But, where
will you be?" Penrod asked, looking up.
Vin sighed,
suddenly looking terribly weak. "Sleeping," she said, and
dropped her sword. Then she Pushed against it, shooting backward into
the sky, toward Luthadel.
He left ruin in
his wake, but it was forgotten, Sazed thought, turning to watch
her fly. He created kingdoms, and then destroyed them as he made
the world anew.
We had the wrong
gender all along.





PART SIX
WORDS IN STEEL
If Rashek fails
to lead Alendi astray, then I have instructed the lad to kill Alendi.





56
HOW CAN VIN
STAND THIS? Elend wondered. He could barely see twenty feet in
the mists. Trees appeared as apparitions around him as he walked,
their branches curling around the road. The mist almost seemed to
live: it moved, swirled, and blew in the cold night air. It snatched
up his puffs of breath, as if drawing a piece of him into it.
He shivered and
kept walking. The snow had melted patchily over the last few days,
leaving heaps in shadowed areas. The canal road, thankfully, was
mostly clear.
He walked with a
pack over his shoulder, carrying only the necessities. At Spook's
suggestion, they'd traded their horses at a village several days
back. They'd rode the creatures hard the last few days, and it was
Spook's estimation that trying to keep them fed—and alive—for
the last leg of their trip to Luthadel wouldn't be worth the effort.
Besides, whatever
was going to happen at the city had likely already occurred. So Elend
walked, alone, in the darkness. Despite the eeriness, he kept his
word and traveled only at night. Not only was it Vin's will, but
Spook claimed that night was safer. Few travelers braved the mists.
Therefore, most bandits didn't bother watching roadways at night.
Spook prowled
ahead, his keen senses allowing him to detect danger before Elend
blundered into it. How does that work, anyway? Elend wondered
as he walked. Tin is supposed to make you see better. But what
does it matter how far you can see, if the mists just obscure
everything?
Writers claimed
that Allomancy could help a person pierce the mists, somehow. Elend
had always wondered what that was like. Of course, he had also
wondered what it felt like to feel the strength of pewter, or to
fight with atium. Allomancers were uncommon, even among Great Houses.
Yet, because of the way Straff had treated him, Elend had always felt
guilty that he hadn't been one.
But, I ended up
as king eventually, even without Allomancy, he thought, smiling
to himself. He'd lost the throne, true. But, while they could take
his crown, they could not take away his accomplishments. He'd proved
that an Assembly could work. He'd protected the skaa, given them
rights, and a taste of freedom they'd never forget. He'd done more
than anyone would have expected of him.
Something rustled
in the mists.
Elend froze,
staring out into the darkness. Sounds like leaves, he thought
nervously. Something moving across them? Or . . . just the wind
blowing them?
He decided at that
moment that there was nothing more unnerving than staring into the
misty darkness, seeing ever-shifting silhouettes. A part of him would
rather face down a koloss army than stand alone, at night, in an
unknown forest.
"Elend,"
someone whispered.
Elend spun. He put
a hand to his chest as he saw Spook approaching. He thought about
chastising the boy for sneaking up on him—but, well, there
wasn't really any other way to approach in the mists.
"Did you see
something?" Spook asked quietly.
Elend shook his
head. "But I think I heard something."
Spook nodded, then
darted off into the mists again. Elend stood, uncertain whether he
should continue on, or just wait. He didn't have to debate for very
long. Spook returned a few moments later.
"Nothing to
worry about," Spook said. "Just a mistwraith."
"What?"
Elend asked.
"Mistwraith,"
Spook said. "You know. Big goopy things? Related to kandra?
Don't tell me you haven't read about them?"
"I have,"
Elend said, nervously scanning the darkness. "But, I never
thought I'd be out in the mists with one."
Spook shrugged.
"It's probably just following our scent, hoping that we'll leave
some trash for it to eat. The things are harmless, mostly."
"Mostly?"
Elend asked.
"You probably
know more about them than I do. Look, I didn't come back here to chat
about scavengers. There's light up ahead."
"A village?"
Elend asked, thinking back to when they'd come this way before.
Spook shook his
head. "Looks like watchfires."
"An army?"
"Maybe. I'm
just thinking you should wait behind for a bit. It could be awkward
if you wander into a scout post."
"Agreed,"
Elend said.
Spook nodded, then
took off into the mists.
And Elend was alone
in the darkness again. He shivered, pulling his cloak close, and eyed
the mists in the direction from which he'd heard the mistwraith. Yes,
he'd read about them. He knew they were supposed to be harmless. But
the thought of something crawling out there—its skeleton made
from random sets of bones—watching him . . .
Don't focus on
that, Elend told himself.
He turned his
attention, instead, to the mists. Vin was right about one thing, at
least. They were lingering longer and longer despite the sunrise.
Some mornings, they remained a full hour after the sun came up. He
could easily imagine the disaster that would befall the land should
the mists persist all day. Crops would fail, animals would starve,
and civilization would collapse.
Could the Deepness
really be something so simple? Elend's own impressions of the
Deepness were seated in scholarly tradition. Some writers dismissed
the entire thing as a legend—a rumor used by the obligators to
enhance their god's aura of divinity. The majority accepted the
historical definition of the Deepness—a dark monster that had
been slain by the Lord Ruler.
And yet, thinking
of it as the mist made some sense. How could a single beast, no
matter how dangerous, threaten an entire land? The mists, though . .
. they could be destructive. Kill plants. Perhaps even . . . kill
people, as Sazed had suggested?
He eyed it shifting
around him, playful, deceptive. Yes, he could see it as the Deepness.
Its reputation—more frightening than a monster, more dangerous
than an army—was one it would deserve. In fact, watching it as
he was, he could see it trying to play tricks on his mind. For
instance, the mist bank directly in front of him seemed to be forming
shapes. Elend smiled as his mind picked out images in the mists. One
almost looked like a person standing there, in front of him.
The person stepped
forward.
Elend jumped,
taking a slight step backward, his foot crunching on a bit of
ice-crusted snow. Don't be silly, he told himself. Your
mind is playing tricks on you. There's nothing—
The shape in the
mists took another step forward. It was indistinct, almost formless,
and yet it seemed real. Random movements in the mists outlined its
face, its body, its legs.
"Lord Ruler!"
Elend yelped, jumping back. The thing continued to regard him.
I'm going mad,
he thought, hands beginning to shake. The mist figure stopped a few
feet in front of him and then raised its right arm and pointed.
North. Away from
Luthadel.
Elend frowned,
glancing in the direction the figure pointed. There was nothing but
more empty mists. He turned back toward it, but it stood quietly, arm
upraised.
Vin spoke of
this thing, he remembered, forcing down his fear. She tried to
tell me about it. And I thought she was making things up! She was
right—just as she'd been right about the mists staying longer
in the day, and the possibility of the mists being the Deepness. He
was beginning to wonder which of them was the scholar.
The mist figure
continued to point.
"What?"
Elend asked, his own voice sounding haunting in the silent air.
It stepped forward,
arm still raised. Elend put a useless hand to his sword, but held his
ground.
"Tell me what
you wish of me!" he said forcefully.
The thing pointed
again. Elend cocked his head. It certainly didn't seem threatening.
In fact, he felt an unnatural feeling of peace coming from it.
Allomancy?
he thought. It's Pulling on my emotions!
"Elend?"
Spook's voice drifted out of the mists.
The figure suddenly
dissolved, its form melting into the mists. Spook approached, his
face dark and shadowed in the night. "Elend? What were you
saying?"
Elend took his hand
off his sword, standing upright. He eyed the mists, still not
completely convinced that he wasn't seeing things. "Nothing,"
he said.
Spook glanced back
the way he had come. "You should come look at this."
"The army?"
Elend asked, frowning.
Spook shook his
head. "No. The refugees."
"The Keepers
are dead, my lord," the old man said, sitting across from Elend.
He didn't have a tent, only a blanket stretched between several
poles. "Either dead, or captured."
Another man brought
Elend a cup of warm tea, his demeanor servile. Both wore the robes of
stewards, and while their eyes bespoke exhaustion, their robes and
hands were clean.
Old habits,
Elend thought, nodding thankfully and taking a sip of the tea.
Terris's people might have declared themselves independent, but a
thousand years of servitude cannot be so easily thrown off.
The camp was an odd
place. Spook said he counted nearly a thousand people in it—a
nightmare of a number to care for, feed, and organize in the cold
winter. Many were elderly, and the men were mostly stewards: eunuchs
bred for genteel service, with no experience in hunting.
"Tell me what
happened," Elend said.
The elderly steward
nodded, his head shaking. He didn't seem particularly frail—actually,
he had that same air of controlled dignity that most stewards
exhibited—but his body had a slow, chronic tremble.
"The Synod
came out into the open, my lord, once the empire fell." He
accepted a cup of his own, but Elend noticed that it was only half
full—a precaution that proved wise as the elderly steward's
shaking nearly spilled its contents. "They became our rulers.
Perhaps it was not wise to reveal themselves so soon."
Not all Terrismen
were Feruchemists; in fact, very few were. The Keepers—people
like Sazed and Tindwyl—had been forced into hiding long ago by
the Lord Ruler. His paranoia that Feruchemical and Allomantic lines
might mix—thereby potentially producing a person with his same
powers—had led him to try and destroy all Feruchemists.
"I've known
Keepers, friend," Elend said softly. "I find it hard to
believe that they could have been easily defeated. Who did this?"
"Steel
Inquisitors, my lord," the old man said.
Elend shivered. So
that's where they've been.
"There were
dozens of them, my lord," the old man said. "They attacked
Ththingdwen with an army of koloss brutes. But, that was just a
distraction, I think. Their real goal as the Synod and the Keepers
themselves. While our army, such as it was, fought the beasts, the
Inquisitors themselves struck at the Keepers."
Lord Ruler . . .
Elend thought, stomach twisting. So, what do we do with the
book Sazed told us to deliver to the Synod? Do we pass it on to these
men, or keep it?
"They took the
bodies with them, my lord," the old man said. "Terris is in
ruins, and that is why we are going south. You said you know King
Venture?"
"I . . . have
met him," Elend said. "He ruled Luthadel, where I am from."
"Will he take
us in, do you think?" the old man asked. "We have little
hope anymore. Tathingdwen was the Terris capital, but even it wasn't
large. We are few, these days—the Lord Ruler saw to that."
"I . . . do
not know if Luthadel can help you, friend."
"We can serve
well," the old man promised. "We were prideful to declare
ourselves free, I think. We struggled to survive even before the
Inquisitors attacked. Perhaps they did us a favor by casting us out."
Elend shook his
head. "Koloss attacked Luthadel just over a week ago," he
said quietly. "I am a refugee myself, Master Steward. For all I
know, the city itself has fallen."
The old man fell
silent. "Ah, I see," he finally said.
"I'm sorry,"
Elend said. "I was traveling back to see what happened. Tell
me—I traveled this way not long ago. How is it that I missed
you in my journey north?"
"We didn't
come by the canal route, my lord," the old man said. "We
cut across country, straight down, so that we could gather supplies
at Suringshath. You . . . have no further word of events at Luthadel,
then? There was a senior Keeper in residence there. We were hoping,
perhaps, to seek her counsel."
"Lady
Tindwyl?" Elend asked.
The old man perked
up. "Yes. You know her?"
"She was an
attendant at the king's court," Elend said.
"Keeper
Tindwyl could be considered our leader now, I think," the old
man said. "We aren't certain how many traveling Keepers there
are, but she is the only known member of the Synod who was out of the
city when we were attacked."
"She was still
in Luthadel when I left," Elend said.
"Then she
might live still," the old man said. "We can hope, I think.
I thank you, traveler, for your information. Please, make yourself
comfortable in our camp."
Elend nodded,
rising. Spook stood a short distance away, in the mists near a pair
of trees. Elend joined him.
The people kept
large fires burning in the night, as if to defy the mists. The light
did some good in dispelling the mists' power—and yet the light
seemed to accentuate them as well, creating three-dimensional shadows
that bewildered the eye. Spook leaned against the scraggly tree
trunk, looking around at things Elend couldn't see. Elend could hear,
however, some of what Spook must be inspecting. Crying children.
Coughing men. Shuffling livestock.
"It doesn't
look good, does it?" Elend said quietly.
Spook shook his
head. "I wish they'd take down all these fires," he
muttered. "The light hurts my eyes."
Elend glanced to
the side. "They aren't that bright."
Spook shrugged.
"They're just wasting wood."
"Forgive them
their comfort, for now. They'll have little enough of it in the weeks
to come." Elend paused, looking over at a passing squad of
Terris "soldiers"—a group of men who were obviously
stewards. Their posture was excellent, and they walked with a smooth
grace, but Elend doubted they knew how to use any weapons beyond a
cooking knife.
No, there is no
army in Terris to help my people.
"You sent Vin
back to gather our allies," Spook said quietly. "To bring
them up to meet with us, perhaps to seek refuge in Terris."
"I know,"
Elend said.
"We can't
gather in Terris, though," Spook said. "Not with the
Inquisitors up there."
"I know,"
Elend said again.
Spook was silent
for a moment. "The whole world is falling apart, El," he
finally said. "Terris, Luthadel . . . "
"Luthadel has
not been destroyed," Elend said, looking sharply at
Spook.
"The koloss—"
"Vin will have
found a way to stop them," Elend said. "For all we know,
she already found the power at the Well of Ascension. We need to keep
going. We can, and will, rebuild whatever was lost. Then we'll worry
about helping Terris."
Spook paused, then
nodded and smiled. Elend was surprised to see how much his confident
words seemed to soothe the boy's concerns. Spook leaned back, eyeing
Elend's still steaming cup of tea, and Elend handed it over with a
mumble that he didn't like heartroot tea. Spook drank happily.
Elend, however,
found matters more troubling than he'd admitted. The Deepness
returning, ghosts in the mist, and Inquisitors making a play for the
Terris Dominance. What else have I been ignoring?
It is a distant
hope. Alendi has survived assassins, wars, and catastrophes. And yet,
I hope that in the frozen mountains of Terris, he may finally be
exposed. I hope for a miracle.





57
"LOOK, WE ALL
KNOW WHAT we need to do," Cett said, pounding the table. "We've
got our armies here, ready and willing to fight. Now, let's go get my
damn country back!"
"The empress
gave us no command to do such a thing," Janarle said, sipping
his tea, completely unfazed by Cett's lack of decorum. "I,
personally, think that we should wait at least until the emperor
returns."
Penrod, the oldest
of the men in the room, had enough tact to look sympathetic. "I
understand that you are concerned for your people, Lord Cett. But we
haven't even had a week to rebuild Luthadel. It is far too early to
be worrying about expanding our influence. We cannot possibly
authorize these preparations."
"Oh, leave
off, Penrod," Cett snapped. "You're not in charge of us."
All three men
turned to Sazed. He felt very awkward, sitting at the head of the
table in Keep Venture's conference chamber. Aides and attendants,
including some of Dockson's bureaucrats, stood at the perimeter of
the sparse room, but only the three rulers—now kings beneath
Elend's imperial rule—sat with Sazed at the table.
"I think that
we should not be hasty, Lord Cett," Sazed said.
"This isn't
haste," Cett said, pounding the table again. "I just want
to order scout and spy reports, so that we can have information we
need when we invade!"
"If we do
invade," Janarle said. "If the emperor decides to recover
Fadrex City, it won't happen until this summer, at the very earliest.
We have far more pressing concerns. My armies have been away from the
Northern Dominance for too long. It is basic political theory that we
should stabilize what we have before we move into new
territory."
"Bah!"
Cett said, waving an indifferent hand.
"You may send
your scouts, Lord Cett," Sazed said. "But they are to seek
information only. They are to engage in no raids, no matter how
tempting the opportunity."
Cett shook a
bearded head. "This is why I never bothered to play
political games with the rest of the Final Empire. Nothing gets done
because everyone is too busy scheming!"
"There is much
to be said for subtlety, Lord Cett," Penrod said. "Patience
brings the greater prize."
"Greater
prize?" Cett asked. "What did the Central Dominance earn
itself by waiting? You waited right up until the moment that your
city fell! If you hadn't been the ones with the best Mistborn . . . "
"Best
Mistborn, my lord?" Sazed asked quietly. "Did you not see
her take command of the koloss? Did you not see her leap across the
sky like an arrow in flight? Lady Vin isn't simply the 'best
Mistborn.'"
The group fell
silent. I have to keep them focused on her, Sazed thought.
Without Vin's leadership—without the threat of her
power—this coalition would dissolve in three heartbeats.
He felt so
inadequate. He couldn't keep the men on-topic, and he couldn't do
much to help them with their various problems. He could just keep
reminding them of Vin's power.
The trouble was, he
didn't really want to. He was feeling something very odd in himself,
feelings he usually didn't have. Disconcern. Apathy. Why did anything
that these men talked about matter? Why did anything matter, now that
Tindwyl was dead?
He gritted his
teeth, trying to force himself to focus.
"Very well,"
Cett said, waving a hand. "I'll send the scouts. Has that food
arrived from Urteau yet, Janarle?"
The younger
nobleman grew uncomfortable. "We . . . may have trouble with
that, my lord. It seems that an unwholesome element has been
rabble-rousing in the city."
"No wonder you
want to send troops back to the Northern Dominance!" Cett
accused. "You're planning to conquer your kingdom back and leave
mine to rot!"
"Urteau is
much closer than your capital, Cett," Janarle said,
turning back to his tea. "It only makes sense to set me up there
before we turn our attention westward."
"We will let
the empress make that decision," Penrod said. He liked to act
the mediator—and by doing so, he made himself seem above the
issues. In essence, he put himself in control by putting himself in
between the other two.
Not all that
different from what Elend tried to do, Sazed thought, with our
armies. The boy had more of a sense of political strategy than
Tindwyl had ever credited him with.
I shouldn't
think about her, he told himself, closing his eyes. Yet, it was
hard not to. Everything Sazed did, everything he thought, seemed
wrong because she was gone. Lights seemed dimmer. Motivations were
more difficult to reach. He found that he had trouble even wanting
to pay attention to the kings, let alone give them direction.
It was foolish, he
knew. How long had Tindwyl been back in his life? Only a few months.
Long ago, he had resigned himself to the fact that he would never be
loved—in general—and that he certainly would never have
her love. Not only did he lack manhood, but he was a rebel and
a dissident—a man well outside of the Terris orthodoxy.
Surely her love for
him had been a miracle. Yet, whom did he thank for that blessing, and
whom did he thank for that blessing, and whom did he curse for
stealing her away? He knew of hundreds of gods. He would hate them
all, if he thought it would do any good.
For the sake of his
own sanity, he forced himself to get distracted by the kings again.
"Listen,"
Penrod was saying, leaning forward, arms on the tabletop. "I
think we're looking at this the wrong way, gentlemen. We shouldn't be
squabbling, we should be happy. We are in a very unique position. In
the time since the Lord Ruler's empire fell, dozens—perhaps
hundreds—of men have tried to set themselves up as kings in
various ways. The one thing they shared, however, was that they all
lacked stability.
"Well, it
appears that we are going to be forced to work together. I am
starting to see this in a favorable light. I will give my allegiance
to the Venture couple—I'll even live with Elend Venture's
eccentric views of government—if it means that I'll still be in
power ten years from now."
Cett scratched at
his beard for a moment, then nodded. "You make a good point,
Penrod. Maybe the first good one I've ever heard out of you."
"But we can't
continue trying to assume that we know what we are to do,"
Janarle said. "We need direction. Surviving the next ten years,
I suspect, is going to depend heavily on my not ending up dead on the
end of that Mistborn girl's knife."
"Indeed,"
Penrod said, nodding curtly. "Master Terrisman. When can we
expect the empress to take command again?"
Once again, all
three pairs of eyes turned to Sazed.
I don't really
care, Sazed thought, then immediately felt guilty. Vin was his
friend. He did care. Even if it was hard to care about anything for
him. He looked down in shame. "Lady Vin is suffering greatly
from the effects of an extended pewter drag," he said. "She
pushed herself very hard this last year, and then ended it by running
all the way back to Luthadel. She is in great need of rest. I think
we should let her be for a time longer."
The others nodded,
and returned to their discussion. Sazed's mind, however, turned to
Vin. He'd understated her malady, and he was beginning to worry. A
pewter drag drained the body, and he suspected that she'd been
forcing herself to stay awake with the metal for months now.
When a Keeper
stored up wakefulness, he slept as if in a coma for a time. He could
only hope that the effects of such a terrible pewter drag were the
same, for Vin hadn't awoken a single time since her return a week
before. Perhaps she'd awake soon, like a Keeper who came out of
sleep.
Perhaps it would
last longer. Her koloss army waited outside the city,
controlled—apparently—even though she was unconscious.
But for how long? Pewter dragging could kill, if the person had
pushed themselves too hard.
What would happen
to the city if she never woke up?
Ash was falling. A
lot of ashfalls lately, Elend thought as he and Spook emerged
from the trees and looked out over the Luthadel plain.
"See,"
Spook said quietly, pointing. "The city gates are broken."
Elend frowned. "But
the koloss are camped outside the city." Indeed, Straff's
army camp was also still there, right where it had been.
"Work crews,"
Spook said, shading his face against the sunlight to protect his
overly sensitive Allomancer's eyes. "Looks like they're burying
corpses outside the city."
Elend's frown
deepened. Vin. What happened to her? Is she all right?
He and Spook had
cut across country, taking a cue from the Terrismen, to make certain
that they didn't get discovered by patrols from the city. Indeed,
this day they'd broken their pattern, traveling a little bit during
the day so that they could arrive at Luthadel just before nightfall.
The mists would soon be coming, and Elend was fatigued—both
from rising early and from walking so long.
More than that, he
was tired of not knowing what had happened to Luthadel. "Can you
see whose flag is set over the gates?" he asked.
Spook paused,
apparently flaring his metals. "Yours," he finally said,
surprised.
Elend smiled. Well,
either they managed to save the city somehow, or this is a very
elaborate trap to capture me. "Come on," he said,
pointing to a line of refugees who were being allowed back into the
city—likely those who had fled before, returning for food now
that the danger was past. "We'll mix with those and make our way
in."
Sazed sighed
quietly, shutting the door to his room. The kings were finished with
the day's arguments. Actually, they were starting to get along quite
well, considering the fact that they'd all tried to conquer each
other just a few weeks before.
Sazed knew he could
take no credit for their newfound amiability, however. He had other
preoccupations.
I've seen many
die, in my days, he thought, walking into the room. Kelsier.
Jadendwyl. Crenda. People I respected. I never wondered what had
happened to their spirits.
He set his candle
on the table, the fragile light illuminating a few scattered pages, a
pile of strange metal nails taken from koloss bodies, and one
manuscript. Sazed sat down at the table, fingers brushing the pages,
remembering the days spent with Tindwyl, studying.
Maybe this is
why Vin put me in charge, he thought. She knew I'd need
something to take my mind off Tindwyl.
And yet, he was
finding more and more that he didn't want to take his mind off
her. Which was more potent? The pain of memory, or the pain of
forgetting? He was a Keeper—it was his life's work to remember.
Forgetting, even in the name of personal peace, was not something
that appealed to him.
He flipped through
the manuscript, smiling fondly in the dark chamber. He'd sent a
cleaned-up, rewritten version with Vin and Elend to the north. This,
however, was the original. The frantically—almost
desperately—scribbled manuscript made by two frightened
scholars.
As he fingered the
pages, the flickering candlelight revealed Tindwyl's firm, yet
beautiful, script. It mixed easily with paragraphs written in Sazed's
own, more reserved hand. At times, a page would alternate between
their different hands a dozen different times.
He didn't realize
that he was crying until he blinked, sending loose a tear, which hit
the page. He looked down, stunned as the bit of water caused a swirl
in the ink.
"What now,
Tindwyl?" he whispered. "Why did we do this? You never
believed in the Hero of Ages, and I never believed in anything, it
appears. What was the point of all this?"
He reached up and
dabbed the tear with his sleeve, preserving the page as best he
could. Despite his tiredness, he began to read, selecting a random
paragraph. He read to remember. To think of days when he hadn't
worried about why they were studying. He had simply been content to
do what he enjoyed best, with the person he had come to love most.
We gathered
everything we could find on the Hero of Ages and the Deepness, he
thought, reading. But so much of it seems contradictory.
He flipped through
to a particular section, one that Tindwyl had insisted that they
include. It contained the several most blatant self-contradictions,
as declared by Tindwyl. He read them over, giving them fair
consideration for the first time. This was Tindwyl the scholar—a
cautious skeptic. He fingered through the passages, reading her
script.
The Hero of Ages
will be tall of stature, one read. A man who cannot be ignored
by others.
The power must
not be taken, read another. Of this, we are certain. It must
be held, but not used. It must be released. Tindwyl had found
that condition foolish, since other sections talked about the Hero
using the power to defeat the Deepness.
All men are
selfish, read another. The Hero is a man who can see the needs
of all beyond his own desires. "If all men are selfish,"
Tindwyl had asked, "then how can the Hero be selfless, as is
said in other passages? And, indeed, how can a humble man be expected
to conquer the world?"
Sazed shook his
head, smiling. At times, her objections had been very well
conceived—but at other times, she had just been struggling to
offer another opinion, no matter how much of a stretch it required.
He ran his fingers across the page again, but paused on the first
paragraph.
Tall of stature,
it said. That wouldn't refer to Vin. It hadn't come from the rubbing,
but another book. Tindwyl had included it because the rubbing, the
more trustworthy source, said he'd be short. Sazed flipped through
the book to the complete transcription of Kwaan's iron-plate
testimony, searching for the passage.
Alendi's height
struck me the first time I saw him, it read. Here was a man
who was small of stature, but who seemed to tower over others, a man
who demanded respect.
Sazed frowned.
Before, he'd argued that there was no contradiction, for one passage
could be interpreted as referring to the Hero's presence or
character, rather than just his physical height. Now, however, Sazed
paused, really seeing Tindwyl's objections for the first time.
And something felt
wrong to him. He looked back at his book, scanning the contents of
the page.
There was a
place for me in the lore of the Anticipation, he read. I
thought myself the Holy First Witness, the prophet foretold to
discover the Hero of Ages. Renouncing Alendi then would have been to
renounce my new position, my acceptance, by the others.
Sazed's frown
deepened. He traced the paragraph. Outside, it was growing dark, and
a few trails of mist curled around the shutters, creeping into the
room before vanishing.
Holy First
Witness, he read again. How did I miss that? It's the same
name the people called me, back at the gates. I didn't recognize it.
"Sazed."
Sazed jumped,
nearly toppling his book to the floor as he turned. Vin stood behind
him, a dark shadow in the poorly lit room.
"Lady Vin!
You're up!"
"You shouldn't
have let me sleep so long," she said.
"We tried to
wake you," he said softly. "You were in a coma."
She paused.
"Perhaps it is
for the best, Lady Vin," Sazed said. "The fighting is done,
and you pushed yourself hard these last few months. It is good for
you to get some rest, now that this is over."
She stepped
forward, shaking her head, and Sazed could see that she looked
haggard, despite her days of rest. "No, Sazed," she said.
"This is not 'over.' Not by far."
"What do you
mean?" Sazed asked, growing concerned.
"I can still
hear it in my head," Vin said, raising a hand to her forehead.
"It's here. In the city."
"The Well of
Ascension?" Sazed asked. "But, Lady Vin, I lied about that.
Truly and apologetically, I don't even know if there is such a
thing."
"Do you
believe me to be the Hero of Ages?"
Sazed looked away.
"A few days ago, on the field outside the city, I felt certain.
But . . . lately . . . I don't seem to know what I believe anymore.
The prophecies and stories are a jumble of contradictions."
"This isn't
about prophecies," Vin said, walking over to his table and
looking at his book. "This is about what needs to be done. I can
feel it . . . pulling me."
She glanced at the
closed window, with the mists curling at the edges. Then, she walked
over and threw the shutters open, letting in the cold winter air. Vin
stood, closing her eyes and letting the mists wash over her. She wore
only a simple shirt and trousers.
"I drew upon
it once, Sazed," she said. "Do you know that? Did I tell
you? When I fought the Lord Ruler. I drew power from the mists.
That's how I defeated him."
Sazed shivered, not
just from the cold. From the tone in her voice, and the air of her
words. "Lady Vin . . . " he said, but wasn't sure how to
continue. Drew upon the mists? What did she mean?
"The Well is
here," she repeated, looking out the window, mist curling into
the room.
"It can't be,
Lady Vin," Sazed said. "All of the reports agree. The Well
of Ascension was found in the Terris Mountains."
Vin shook her head.
"He changed the world, Sazed."
He paused,
frowning. "What?"
"The Lord
Ruler," she whispered. "He created the Ashmounts. The
records say he made the vast deserts around the empire, that he broke
the land in order to preserve it. Why should we assume that things
look like they did when he first climbed to the Well? He created
mountains. Why couldn't he have flattened them?"
Sazed felt a chill.
"It's what I
would do," Vin said. "If I knew the power would return, if
I wanted to preserve it. I'd hide the Well. I'd let the legends
remain, talking about mountains to the north. Then, I would build my
city around the Well so that I could keep an eye on it."
She turned, looking
at him. "It's here. The power waits."
Sazed opened his
mouth to object, but could find nothing. He had no faith. Who was he
to argue with such things? As he paused, he heard voices below, from
outside.
Voices? he
thought. At night? In the mists? Curious, he strained to hear
what was being said, but they were too far away. He reached into the
bag beside his table. Most of his metalminds were empty; he wore only
his copperminds, with their stores of ancient knowledge. Inside the
sack, he found a small pouch. It contained the ten rings he had
prepared for the siege, but had never used. He pulled it open, took
out one of the ten, then tucked the bag into his sash.
With this ring—a
tinmind—he could tap hearing. The words below became distinct
to him.
"The king! The
king has returned!"
Vin leaped out the
window.
"I don't fully
understand how she does it either, El," Ham said, walking with
his arm in a sling.
Elend walked
through the city streets, people trailing behind him, speaking in
excited tones. The crowd was growing larger and larger as people
heard that Elend had returned. Spook eyed them uncertainly, but
seemed to be enjoying the attention.
"I was out
cold for the last part of the battle," Ham was saying. "Only
pewter kept me alive—koloss slaughtered my team, breached the
walls of the keep I was defending. I got out, and found Sazed, but my
mind was growing muddled by then. I remember falling unconscious
outside Keep Hasting. When I woke up, Vin had already taken the city
back. I . . . "
They paused. Vin
stood in front of them in the city street. Quiet, dark. In the mists,
she almost looked like the spirit Elend had seen earlier.
"Vin?" he
asked in the eerie air.
"Elend,"
she said, rushing forward, into his arms, and the air of mystery was
gone. She shivered as she held him. "I'm sorry. I think I did
something bad."
"Oh?" he
asked. "What is that?"
"I made you
emperor."
Elend smiled. "I
noticed, and I accept."
"After all you
did to make certain the people had a choice?"
Elend shook his
head. "I'm beginning to think my opinions were simplistic.
Honorable, but . . . incomplete. We'll deal with this. I'm just glad
to find that my city is still standing."
Vin smiled. She
looked tired.
"Vin?" he
asked. "Are you still pewter-dragging?"
"No," she
said. "This is something else." She glanced to the side,
face thoughtful, as if deciding something.
"Come,"
she said.
Sazed watched out
the window, a second tinmind enhancing his sight. It was indeed Elend
below. Sazed smiled, one of the weights on his soul removed. He
turned, intending to go and meet the king.
And then he saw
something blowing on the floor in front of him. A scrap of paper. He
knelt down, picking it up, noticing his own handwriting on it. Its
edges were jagged from having been ripped. He frowned, walking over
to his table, opening the book to the page with Kwaan's narrative. A
piece was missing. The same piece as before, the one that had been
ripped free that time with Tindwyl. He'd almost forgotten the strange
occurrence with the pages all missing the same sentence.
He'd rewritten this
page, from his metalmind, after they'd found the torn sheets. Now the
same bit had been torn free, the last sentence. Just to make certain,
he put it up next to his book. It fit perfectly. Alendi must not
reach the Well of Ascension, it read, for he must not be allowed to
take the power for himself. It was the exact wording Sazed had in
his memory, the exact wording of the rubbing.
Why would
Kwaan have worried about this? he thought, sitting down. He
says he knew Alendi better than anyone else. In fact, he called
Alendi an honorable man on several occasions.
Why would Kwaan be
so worried about Alendi taking the power for himself?
Vin walked through
the mists. Elend, Ham, and Spook trailed behind her, the crowd
dispersed by Elend's order—though some soldiers did stay close
to protect Elend.
Vin continued on,
feeling the pulsings, the thumpings, the power that shook her very
soul. Why couldn't the others feel it?
"Vin?"
Elend asked. "Where are we going?"
"Kredik Shaw,"
she said softly.
"But . . .
why?"
She just shook her
head. She knew the truth, now. The Well was in the city. With how
strong the pulsings were growing, she might have assumed that their
direction would be harder to discern. But that wasn't the way it was
at all. Now that they were loud and full, she found it easier.
Elend glanced back
at the others, and she could sense his concern. Up ahead, Kredik Shaw
loomed in the night. Spires, like massive spikes, jutted from the
ground in an off-balance pattern, reaching accusingly toward the
stars above.
"Vin,"
Elend said. "The mists are acting . . . strangely."
"I know,"
she said. "They're guiding me."
"No,
actually," Elend said. "They kind of look like they're
pulling away from you."
Vin shook her head.
This felt right. How could she explain? Together, they entered
the remnants of the Lord Ruler's palace.
The Well was
here all along, Vin thought, amused. She could feel the pulses
vibrating through the building. Why hadn't she noticed it before?
The pulses were
still too weak, then, she realized. The Well wasn't full yet.
Now it is. And it called to her.
She followed the
same path as before. The path she'd followed with Kelsier, breaking
into Kredik Shaw on a doomful night when she had nearly died. The
path she'd followed on her own, the night she had come to kill the
Lord Ruler. The tight stone corridors opened into the room shaped
like an upside-down bowl. Elend's lantern glistened against the fine
stonework and murals, mostly in black and gray. The stone shack stood
in the center of the room, abandoned, enclosed.
"I think we're
finally going to find your atium, Elend," Vin said, smiling.
"What?"
Elend said, his voice echoing in the chamber. "Vin, we searched
here. We tried everything."
"Not enough,
apparently," Vin said, eyeing the small
building-within-a-building, but not moving toward it.
This is where
I'd put it, she thought. It makes sense. The Lord Ruler would
have wanted to keep the Well close so that when the power returned,
he'd be able to take it.
But I killed him
before that could happen.
The booming came
from below. They'd torn up sections of the floor, but had stopped
when they'd hit solid rock. There had to be a way down. She walked
over, searching through the building-within-a-building, but found
nothing. She left, passing her confused friends, frustrated.
Then she tried
burning her metals. As always, the blue lines shot up around her,
pointing to sources of metal. Elend was wearing several, as was
Spook, though Ham was clean. Some of the stonework bore metal inlays,
and lines pointed to those.
Everything was as
expected. There was nothing . . .
Vin frowned,
stepping to the side. One of the inlays bore a particularly thick
line. Too thick, in fact. She frowned, inspecting the line as it—like
the others—pointed from her chest directly at the stone wall.
This one seemed to be pointing beyond the wall.
What?
She Pulled on it.
Nothing happened. So, she Pulled harder, grunting as she was yanked
toward the wall. She released the line, glancing about. There were
inlays on the floor. Deep ones. Curious, she anchored herself by
Pulling on these, then Pulled on the wall again. She thought she felt
something budge.
She burned
duralumin and Pulled as hard as she could. The explosion of power
nearly ripped her apart, but her anchor held, and duralumin-fueled
pewter kept her alive. And a section of the wall slid open, stone
grinding against stone in the quiet room. Vin gasped, letting go as
her metals ran out.
"Lord Ruler!"
Spook said. Ham was quicker, however, moving with the speed of pewter
and peeking into the opening. Elend stayed at her side, grabbing her
arm as she nearly fell.
"I'm fine,"
Vin said, downing a vial and restoring her metals. The power of the
Well thumped around her. It almost seemed to shake the room.
"There are
stairs in here," Ham said, poking his head back out.
Vin steadied
herself and nodded to Elend, and the two of them followed Ham and
Spook through the false section of the wall.
But, I must
continue with the sparsest of detail, Kwaan's account read.
Space
is limited. The other Worldbringers must have thought themselves
humble when they came to me, admitting that they had been wrong about
Alendi. Even then, I was beginning to doubt my original declaration.
But, I was prideful.
In
the end, my pride may have doomed us all. I had never received much
attention from my brethren; they thought that my work and my
interests were unsuitable to a Worldbringer. The couldn't see how my
studies, which focused on nature instead of religion, benefited the
people of the fourteen lands.
As
the one who found Alendi, however, I became someone important.
Foremost among the Worldbringers. There was a place for me in the
lore of the Anticipation—I thought myself the Holy First
Witness, the prophet foretold to discover the Hero of Ages.
Renouncing Alendi then would have been to renounce my new position,
my acceptance, by the others.
And
so I did not. But I do so now.
Let
it be known that I, Kwaan, Worldbringer of Terris, am a fraud. Alendi
was never the Hero of Ages. At best, I have amplified his virtues,
creating a hero where there was none. At worst, I fear that I have
corrupted all we believe.
Sazed sat at his
table, reading from his book.
Something is not
right here, he thought. He traced back a few lines, looking at
the words "Holy First Witness" again. Why did that line
keep bothering him?
He sat back,
sighing. Even if the prophecies did speak about the future, they
wouldn't be things to follow or use as guideposts. Tindwyl was right
on that count. His own study had proven them to be unreliable and
shadowed.
So what was the
problem?
It just doesn't
make sense.
But, then again,
sometimes religion didn't make literal sense. Was that the reason, or
was that his own bias? His growing frustration with the teachings he
had memorized and taught, but which had betrayed him in the end?
It came down to the
scrap of paper on his desk. The torn one. Alendi must not be
allowed to reach the Well of Ascension . . . .
Someone was
standing next to his desk.
Sazed gasped,
stumbling back, nearly tripping over his chair. It wasn't actually a
person. It was a shadow—formed, it seemed, from streams of
mist. They were very faint, still trailing through the window that
Vin had opened, but they made a person. Its head seemed turned toward
the table, toward the book. Or . . . perhaps the scrap of paper.
Sazed felt like
running, like scrambling away in fear, but his scholar's mind dredged
something up to fight his terror. Alendi, he thought. The
one everyone thought was the Hero of Ages. He said he saw a thing
made of mist following him.
Vin claimed to
have seen it as well.
"What . . . do
you want?" he asked, trying to remain calm.
The spirit didn't
move.
Could it be . .
. her? he wondered with shock. Many religions claimed that the
dead continued to walk the world, just beyond the view of mortals.
But this thing was too short to be Tindwyl. Sazed was sure that he
would have recognized her, even in such an amorphous form.
Sazed tried to
gauge where it was looking. He reached out a hesitant hand, picking
up the scrap of paper.
The spirit raised
an arm, pointing toward the center of the city. Sazed frowned.
"I don't
understand," he said.
The spirit pointed
more insistently.
"Write down
for me what you want me to do."
It just pointed.
Sazed stood for a
long moment in the room with only one candle, then glanced at the
open book. The wind flipped its pages, showing his handwriting, then
Tindwyl's, then his again.
Alendi must not
be allowed to reach the Well of Ascension. He must not be allowed to
take the power for himself.
Perhaps . . .
perhaps Kwaan knew something that nobody else had. Could the power
corrupt even the best of people? Could that be why he turned against
Alendi, trying to stop him?
The mist spirit
pointed again.
If the spirit
tore free that sentence, perhaps it was trying to tell me something.
But . . . Vin wouldn't take the power for herself. She wouldn't
destroy, as the Lord Ruler did, would she?
And if she didn't
have a choice?
Outside, someone
screamed. The yell was of pure terror, and it was soon joined by
others. A horrible, echoing set of sounds in a dark night.
There wasn't time
to think. Sazed grabbed the candle, spilling wax on the table in his
haste, and left the room.
The winding set of
stone stairs led downward for quite some time. Vin walked down them,
Elend at her side, the thumping sounding loudly in her ears. At the
bottom, the stairwell opened into . . .
A vast chamber.
Elend held his lantern high, looking down into a huge stone cavern.
Spook was already halfway down the stone steps leading to the floor.
Ham was following.
"Lord Ruler .
. . " Elend whispered, standing at Vin's side. "We'd have
never found this without tearing down the entire building!"
"That was
probably the idea," Vin said. "Kredik Shaw isn't simply a
palace, but a capstone. Built to hide something. This. Above,
those inlays on the walls hid the cracks of the doorway, and the
metal in them obscured the opening mechanism from Allomantic eyes. If
I hadn't had a hint . . . "
"Hint?"
Elend asked, turning to her.
Vin shook her head,
nodding to the steps. The two began down them. Below, she heard
Spook's voice ring.
"There's food
down here!" he yelled. "Cans and cans of it!"
Indeed, they found
rank upon rank of shelves sitting on the cavern floor, meticulously
packed as if set aside in preparation for something important. Vin
and Elend reached the cavern floor as Ham chased after Spook, calling
for him to slow down. Elend made as if to follow, but Vin grabbed his
arm. She was burning iron.
"Strong source
of metal that way," she said, growing eager.
Elend nodded, and
they rushed through the cavern, passing shelf after shelf. The
Lord Ruler must have prepared these, she thought. But for what
purpose?
She didn't care at
the moment. She didn't really care about the atium either, but
Elend's eagerness to find it was too much to ignore. They rushed up
to the end of the cavern, where they found the source of the metal
line.
A large metal
plaque hung on the wall, like the one Sazed had described finding in
the Conventical of Seran. Elend was clearly disappointed when they
saw it. Vin, however, stepped forward, looking through tin-enhanced
eyes to see what it contained.
"A map?"
Elend asked. "That's the Final Empire."
Indeed, a map of
the empire was carved into the metal. Luthadel was marked at the
center. A small circle marked another city nearby.
"Why is
Statlin City circled?" Elend asked, frowning.
Vin shook her head.
"This isn't what we came for," she said. "There."
A tunnel split off from the main cavern. "Come on."
Sazed ran through
the streets, not even certain what he was doing. He followed the mist
spirit, which was difficult to trace in the night, as his candle had
long since puffed out.
People screamed.
Their panicked sounds gave him chills, and he itched to go and see
what the problem was. Yet the mist spirit was demanding; it paused to
catch his attention if it lost him. It could simply be leading him to
his death. And yet . . . he felt a trust for it that he could not
explain.
Allomancy?
he thought. Pulling on my emotions?
Before he could
consider that further, he stumbled across the first body. It was a
skaa man in simple clothing, skin stained with ash. His face was
twisted in a grimace of pain, and the ash on the ground was smeared
from his thrashings.
Sazed gasped as he
pulled to a halt. He knelt, studying the body by the dim light of an
open window nearby. This man had not died easily.
It's . . . like
the killings I was studying, he thought. Months ago, in the village
to the south. The man there said that the mists had killed his
friend. Caused him to fall to the ground and thrash about.
The spirit appeared
in front of Sazed, its posture insistent. Sazed looked up, frowning.
"You did this?" he whispered.
The thing shook its
head violently, pointing. Kredik Shaw was just ahead. It was the
direction Vin and Elend had gone earlier.
Sazed stood. Vin
said she thought the Well was still in the city, he thought. The
Deepness has come upon us, as its tendrils have been doing in the far
reaches of the empire for some time. Killing.
Something
greater than we comprehend is going on.
He still couldn't
believe that Vin going to the Well would be dangerous. She had read;
she knew Rashek's story. She wouldn't take the power for herself. He
was confident. But not completely certain. In fact, he was no longer
certain what they should do with the Well.
I have to get to
her. Stop her, talk to her, prepare her. We can't rush into something
like this. If, indeed, they were going to take the power at the
Well, they needed to think about it first and decide what the best
course was.
The mist spirit
continued to point. Sazed stood and ran forward, ignoring the horror
of the screams in the night. He approached the doors of the massive
palace structure with its spires and spikes, then dashed inside.
The mist spirit
remained behind, in the mists that had birthed it. Sazed lit his
candle again with a flint, and waited. The mist spirit did not move
forward. Still feeling an urgency, Sazed left it behind, continuing
into the depths of the Lord Ruler's former home. The stone walls were
cold and dark, his candle a wan light.
The Well
couldn't be here, he thought. It's supposed to be in the mountains.
Yet, so much about
that time was vague. He was beginning to doubt that he'd ever
understood the things he'd studied.
He quickened his
step, shading his candle with his hand, knowing where he needed to
go. He'd visited the building-within-a-building, the place where the
Lord Ruler had once spent his time. Sazed had studied the place after
the empire's fall, chronicling and cataloguing. He stepped into the
outer room, and was halfway across it before he noticed the
unfamiliar opening in the wall.
A figure stood in
doorway, head bowed. Sazed's candlelight reflected the polished
marble walls, the silvery inlayed murals, and the spikes in the man's
eyes.
"Marsh?"
Sazed asked, shocked. "Where have you been?"
"What are you
doing, Sazed?" Marsh whispered.
"I'm going to
Vin," he said, confused. "She has found the Well, Marsh. We
have to get to her, stop her from doing anything with it until we're
sure what it does."
Marsh remained
silent for a short time. "You should not have come here,
Terrisman," he finally said, head still bowed.
"Marsh? What
is going on?" Sazed took a step forward, feeling urgent.
"I wish I
knew. I wish . . . I wish I understood."
"Understood
what?" Sazed asked, voice echoing in the domed room.
Marsh stood
silently for a moment. Then he looked up, focusing his sightless
spikeheads on Sazed.
"I wish I
understood why I have to kill you," he said, then lifted a hand.
An Allomantic Push slammed into the metal bracers on Sazed's arms,
throwing him backward, crashing him into the hard stone wall.
"I'm sorry,"
Marsh whispered.
Alendi must not
reach the Well of Ascension . . . .





58
"LORD RULER!"
ELEND WHISPERED, pausing at the edge of the second cavern.
Vin joined him.
They had walked in the passage for some time, leaving the storage
cavern far behind, walking through a natural stone tunnel. It had
ended here, at a second, slightly smaller cavern that was clogged
with a thick, dark smoke. It didn't seep out of the cavern, as it
should have, but billowed and churned upon itself.
Vin stepped
forward. The smoke didn't choke her, as she expected. There was
something oddly welcoming about it. "Come on," she said,
walking through it across the cavern floor. "I see light up
ahead."
Elend joined her
nervously.
Thump. Thump.
Thump.
Sazed slammed into
the wall. He was no Allomancer; he had no pewter to strengthen his
body. As he collapsed to the ground, he felt a sharp pain in his
side, and knew he had cracked a rib. Or worse.
Marsh strode
forward, faintly illuminated by Sazed's candle, which burned fitfully
where Sazed had dropped it.
"Why did you
come?" Marsh whispered as Sazed struggled to his knees.
"Everything was going so well." He watched with iron eyes
as Sazed slowly crawled away. Then Marsh Pushed again, throwing Sazed
to the side.
Sazed skidded
across the beautiful white floor, crashing into another wall. His arm
snapped, cracking, and his vision shuddered.
Through his pain,
he saw Marsh stoop down and pick something up. A small pouch. It had
fallen from Sazed's sash. It was filled with bits of metal; Marsh
obviously thought it was a coin pouch.
"I'm sorry,"
Marsh said again, then raised a hand and Pushed the bag at Sazed.
The pouch shot
across the room and hit Sazed, ripping, the bits of metal inside
tearing into Sazed's flesh. He didn't have to look down to know how
badly he was injured. Oddly, he could no longer feel his pain—but
he could feel the blood, warm, on his stomach and legs.
I'm . . . sorry,
too, Sazed thought as the room grew dark, and he fell to his
knees. I've failed . . . though I know not at what. I can't even
answer Marsh's question. I don't know why I came here.
He felt himself
dying. It was an odd experience. His mind was resigned, yet confused,
yet frustrated, yet slowly . . . having . . . trouble . . .
Those weren't
coins, a voice seemed to whisper.
The thought rattled
in his dying mind.
The bag Marsh
shot at you. Those weren't coins. They were rings, Sazed. Eight of
them. You took out two—eyesight and hearing. You left the other
ones where they were.
In the pouch,
tucked into your sash.
Sazed collapsed,
death coming upon him like a cold shadow. And yet, the thought rang
true. Ten rings, embedded into his flesh. Touching him. Weight. Speed
of body. Sight. Hearing. Touch. Scent. Strength. Speed of mind.
Wakefulness.
And health.
He tapped gold. He
didn't have to be wearing the metalmind to use it—he only had
to be touching it. His chest stopped burning, and his vision snapped
back into focus. His arm straightened, the bones reknitting as he
drew upon several days' worth of health in a brief flash of power. He
gasped, his mind recovering from its near death, but the goldmind
restored a crisp clarity to his thoughts.
The flesh healed
around the metal. Sazed stood, pulling the empty bag from where it
stuck from his skin, leaving the rings inside of him. He dropped it
to the ground, the wound sealing, draining the last of the power from
the goldmind. Marsh stopped at the mouth of the doorway, turning in
surprise. Sazed's arm still throbbed, probably cracked, and his ribs
were bruised. Such a short burst of health could only do so much.
But he was alive.
"You have
betrayed us, Marsh," Sazed said. "I did not realize those
spikes stole a man's soul, as well as his eyes."
"You cannot
fight me," Marsh replied quietly, his voice echoing in the dark
room. "You are no warrior."
Sazed smiled,
feeling the small metalminds within him give him power. "Neither,
I think, are you."
I am involved in
something that is far over my head, Elend thought as they passed
through the strange, smoke-filled cavern. The floor was rough and
uneven, and his lantern seemed dim—as if the swirling black
smoke were sucking in the light.
Vin walked
confidently. No, determinedly. There was a difference. Whatever was
at the end of this cavern, she obviously wanted to discover it.
And . . . what
will it be? Elend thought. The Well of Ascension?
The Well was a
thing of mythology—something spoken of by obligators when they
taught about the Lord Ruler. And yet . . . he had followed Vin
northward, expecting to find it, hadn't he? Why be so tentative now?
Perhaps because he
was finally beginning to accept what was happening. And it worried
him. Not because he feared for his life, but because suddenly he
didn't understand the world. Armies he could understand, even if he
didn't know how to defeat them. But a thing like the Well? A thing of
gods, a thing beyond the logic of scholars and philosophers?
That was
terrifying.
They finally
approached the other side of the smoky cavern. Here, there appeared
to be a final chamber, one much smaller than the first two. As they
stepped into it, Elend noticed something immediately: this room was
man-made. Or, at least, it had the feel of something man-made.
Stalactites formed pillars through the low-ceilinged room, and they
were spaced far too evenly to be random. Yet, at the same time, they
looked as if they had grown naturally, and showed no signs of being
worked.
The air seemed
warmer inside—and, thankfully, they passed out of the smoke as
they entered. A low light came from something on the far side of the
chamber, though Elend couldn't distinguish the source. It didn't look
like torchlight. It was the wrong color, and it shimmered rather than
flickered.
Vin wrapped an arm
around him, staring toward the back of the chamber, suddenly seeming
apprehensive.
"Where is that
light coming from?" Elend asked, frowning.
"A pool,"
Vin said quietly, her eyes far keener than his. "A glowing white
pool."
Elend frowned. But,
the two of them didn't move. Vin seemed hesitant. "What?"
he asked.
She pulled against
him. "That's the Well of Ascension. I can feel it inside
of my head. Beating."
Elend forced a
smile, feeling a surreal sense of displacement. "That's what we
came for, then."
"What if I
don't know what to do?" Vin asked quietly. "What if I take
the power, but I don't know how to use it? What if I . . . become
like the Lord Ruler?"
Elend looked down
at her, arms wrapped around him, and his fear lessened a bit. He
loved her. The situation they faced, it couldn't easily fit into his
logical world. But Vin had never really needed logic. And he didn't
need it either, if he trusted her.
He took her head in
his hands, rotating it up to look at him. "Your eyes are
beautiful."
She frowned.
"What—"
"And,"
Elend continued, "part of the beauty in them comes from your
sincerity. You won't become the Lord Ruler, Vin. You'll know what to
do with that power. I trust you."
She smiled
hesitantly, then nodded. However, she didn't move forward into the
cavern. Instead, she pointed at something over Elend's shoulder.
"What's that?"
Elend turned,
noticing a ledge on the back wall of the small room. It grew straight
out of the rock just beside the doorway they had entered. Vin
approached the ledge, and Elend followed behind her, noticing the
shards that lay upon it.
"It looks like
broken pottery," Elend said. There were several patches of it,
and more of it was scattered on the floor beneath the ledge.
Vin picked up a
piece, but there didn't seem to be anything distinctive about it. She
looked at Elend, who was fishing through the pottery pieces. "Look
at this," he said, holding up one that hadn't been broken like
the others. It was a disklike piece of fired clay with a single bead
of some metal at the center.
"Atium?"
she asked.
"It looks like
the wrong color," he said, frowning.
"What is it,
then?"
"Maybe we'll
find the answers over there," Elend said, turning and looking
down the rows of pillars toward the light. Vin nodded, and they
walked forward.
Marsh immediately
tried to Push Sazed away by the metal bracers on his arms. Sazed was
ready, however, and he tapped his ring ironmind—drawing forth
the weight he had stored within it. His body grew denser, and he felt
its weight pulling him down, his fists feeling like balls of iron on
the ends of lead arms.
Marsh immediately
lurched away, thrown violently backward by his own Push. He slammed
into the back wall, a cry of surprise escaping his lips. It echoed in
the small, domed room.
Shadows danced in
the room as the candle grew weaker. Sazed tapped sight, enhancing his
vision, and released iron as he dashed toward the addled Inquisitor.
Marsh, however, recovered quickly. He reached out, Pulling an unlit
lamp off the wall. It zipped through the air, flying toward Marsh.
Sazed tapped zinc.
He felt something like a twisted hybrid of an Allomancer and a
Feruchemist, his sources of metal embedded within him. The gold had
healed his insides, made him whole, but the rings still remained
within his flesh. This was what the Lord Ruler had done, keeping his
metalminds inside of him, piercing his flesh so that they would be
harder to steal.
That had always
seemed morbid to Sazed. Now, he saw how useful it could be. His
thoughts sped up, and he quickly saw the trajectory of the lamp.
Marsh would be able to use it as a weapon against him. So Sazed
tapped steel. Allomancy and Feruchemy had one fundamental difference:
Allomancy drew its powers from the metals themselves, and so the
amount of power was limited; in Feruchemy, one could compound an
attribute many times, drawing out months' worth of power in a few
minutes.
Steel stored
physical speed. Sazed zipped across the room, air rushing in his ears
as he shot past the open doorway. He snatched the lamp out of the
air, then tapped iron hard—increasing his weight manyfold—and
tapped pewter to give himself massive strength.
Marsh didn't have
time to react. He was now Pulling on a lamp held in Sazed's inhumanly
strong, inhumanly heavy, hand. Again, Marsh was yanked by his own
Allomancy. The Pull threw him across the room, directly toward Sazed.
Sazed turned,
slamming the lamp into Marsh's face. The metal bent in his hand, and
the force threw Marsh backward. The Inquisitor hit the marble wall, a
spray of blood misting in the air. As Marsh slumped to the ground,
Sazed could see that he'd driven one of the eye-spikes back into the
front of the skull, crushing the bone around the socket.
Sazed returned his
weight to normal, then jumped forward, raising his impromptu weapon
again. Marsh, however, threw an arm up and Pushed. Sazed skidded back
a few feet before he was able to tap the ironmind again, increasing
his weight.
Marsh grunted, his
Push forcing him back against the wall. It also, however, kept Sazed
at bay. Sazed struggled to step forward, but the pressure of Marsh's
Push—along with his own bulky, weighed-down body—made
walking difficult. The two strained for a moment, Pushing against
each other in the darkening light. The room's inlays sparkled, quiet
murals watching them, open doorway leading down to the Well just to
the side.
"Why, Marsh?"
Sazed whispered.
"I don't
know," Marsh said, his voice coming out in a growl.
With a flash of
power, Sazed released his ironmind and instead tapped steel,
increasing his speed again. He dropped the lamp, ducking to the side,
moving more quickly than Marsh could track. The lamp was forced
backward, but then fell to the ground as Marsh let go of his Push,
jumping forward, obviously trying to keep from being trapped against
the wall.
But Sazed was
faster. He spun, raising a hand to try to pull out Marsh's linchpin
spike—the one in between his shoulder blades, pounded down
lengthwise into the back. Pulling this one spike would kill an
Inquisitor; it was the weakness the Lord Ruler had built into them.
Sazed skidded
around Marsh to attack from behind. The spike in Marsh's right eye
protruded several extra inches out the back of his skull, and it
dribbled blood.
Sazed's steelmind
ran out.
The rings had never
been intended to last long, and his two extreme bursts had drained
this one in seconds. He slowed with a dreadful lurch, but his arm was
still raised, and he still had the strength of ten men. He could see
the bulge of the linchpin spike underneath Marsh's robe. If he could
just—
Marsh spun, then
dexterously knocked aside Sazed's hand. He rammed an elbow into
Sazed's stomach, then brought a backhand up and crashed it into his
face.
Sazed fell
backward, and his pewtermind ran out, his strength disappearing. He
hit the hard steel ground with a grunt of pain, and rolled.
Marsh loomed in the
dark room. The candle flickered.
"You were
wrong, Sazed," Marsh said quietly. "Once, I was not a
warrior, but that has changed. You spent the last two years teaching,
but I spent them killing. Killing so many people . . . ."
Marsh stepped
forward, and Sazed coughed, trying to get his bruised body to move.
He worried that he'd rebroken his arm. He tapped zinc again, speeding
up his thoughts, but that didn't help his body move. He could only
watch—more fully aware of his predicament and unable to do a
thing to stop it—as Marsh picked up the fallen lamp.
The candle went
out.
Yet, Sazed could
still see Marsh's face. Blood dripped from the crushed socket, making
the man's expression even harder to read. The Inquisitor seemed . . .
sorrowful as he raised the lamp in a clawlike grip, intending to
smash it down into Sazed's face.
Wait, Sazed
thought. Where is that light coming from?
A dueling cane
smashed against the back of Marsh's head, shattering and throwing up
splinters.
Vin and Elend
walked up to the pool. Elend knelt quietly beside it, but Vin just
stood. Staring at the glittering waters.
They were gathered
in a small depression in the rock, and they looked thick—like
metal. A silvery white, glowing liquid metal. The Well was only a few
feet across, but its power loomed in her mind.
Vin was so
enraptured by the beautiful pool, in fact, that she didn't notice the
mist spirit until Elend's grip tightened on her arm. She looked up,
noticing the spirit standing before them. It seemed to have its head
bowed, but as she turned, its shadowy form stood up straighter.
She'd never seen
the creature outside of the mist. It still wasn't completely . . .
whole. Mist puffed from its body, flowing downward, creating its
amorphous form. A persistent pattern.
Vin hissed quietly,
pulling out a dagger.
"Wait!"
Elend said, standing.
She frowned,
shooting him a glance.
"I don't think
it's dangerous, Vin," he said, stepping away from her, toward
the spirit.
"Elend, no!"
she said, but he gently shook her free.
"It visited me
while you were gone, Vin," he explained. "It didn't hurt
me. It just . . . seemed like it wanted me to know something."
He smiled, still wearing his nondescript cloak and traveling
clothing, and walked slowly up to the mist spirit. "What is it
you want?"
The mist spirit
stood immobile for a moment, then it raised its arm. Something
flashed, reflecting the pool's light.
"No!"
Vin screamed, dashing forward as the spirit slashed across Elend's
gut. Elend grunted in pain, then stumbled back.
"Elend!"
Vin said, scrambling to Elend's side as he slipped and fell to the
ground. The spirit backed away, dripping blood from somewhere within
its deceptively incorporeal form. Elend's blood.
Elend lay, shocked,
eyes wide. Vin flared pewter and ripped open the front of his jacket,
exposing the wound. The spirit had cut deeply into his stomach,
slashing the gut open.
"No . . . no .
. . no . . . " Vin said, mind growing numb, Elend's blood on her
hands.
The wound was very
bad. Deadly.
Ham dropped the
broken cane, one arm still in a sling. The beefy Thug looked
incredibly pleased with himself as he stepped over Marsh's body and
reached his good hand toward Sazed.
"Didn't expect
to find you here, Saze," the Thug said.
Dazed, Sazed took
the hand and climbed to his feet. He stumbled over Marsh's body,
somehow distractedly knowing that a simple club to the head wouldn't
be enough to kill the creature. Yet Sazed was too addled to care. He
picked up his candle, lit it from Ham's lantern, then made his way
toward the stairs, forcing himself onward.
He had to keep
going. He had to get to Vin.
Vin cradled Elend
in her arms, her cloak forming a hasty—and dreadfully
inadequate—bandage around his torso.
"I love you,"
she whispered, tears warm on her cold cheeks. "Elend, I love
you. I love you . . . "
Love wouldn't be
enough. He was trembling, eyes staring upward, barely able to focus.
He gasped, and blood bubbled in his spittle.
She turned to the
side, numbly realizing where she knelt. The pool glowed beside her,
just inches from where Elend had fallen. Some of his blood had
dribbled into the pool, though it didn't mix with the liquid metal.
I can save him,
she realized. The power of creation rests just inches from my
fingers. This was the place where Rashek had ascended to godhood.
The Well of Ascension.
She looked back at
Elend, at his dying eyes. He tried to focus on her, but he seemed to
be having trouble controlling his muscles. It seemed like . . . he
was trying to smile.
Vin rolled up her
coat and put it beneath his head. Then, wearing just her trousers and
shirt, she walked up to the pool. She could hear it thumping. As if .
. . calling to her. Calling for her to join with it.
She stepped onto
the pool. It resisted her touch, but her foot began to sink, slowly.
She stepped forward, moving into the center of the pool, waiting as
she sank. Within seconds, the pool was up to her chest, the glowing
liquid all around her.
She took a breath,
then leaned her head back, looking up as the pool absorbed her,
covering her face.
Sazed stumbled down
the stairs, candle held in quivering fingers. Ham was calling after
him. He passed a confused Spook on the landing below, and ignored the
boy's questions.
However, as he
began to make his way down to the cavern floor, he slowed. A small
tremor ran through the rock.
Somehow, he knew
that he was too late.
The power came upon
her suddenly.
She felt the liquid
pressing against her, creeping into her body, crawling, forcing its
way through the pores and openings in her skin. She opened her mouth
to scream, and it rushed in that way too, choking her, gagging her.
With a sudden
flare, her earlobe began to hurt. She cried out, pulling her earring
free, dropping it into the depths. She pulled off her sash, letting
it—and her Allomantic vials—go as well, removing the only
metals on her person.
Then she started to
burn. She recognized the sensation: it was exactly like the feeling
of burning metals in her stomach, except it came from her entire
body. Her skin flared, her muscles flamed, and her very bones seemed
on fire. She gasped, and realized the metal was gone from her throat.
She was glowing.
She felt the power within, as if it were trying to burst back out. It
was like the strength she gained by burning pewter, but amazingly
more potent. It was a force of incredible capacity. It would have
been beyond her ability to understand, but it expanded her mind,
forcing her to grow and comprehend what she now possessed.
She could remake
the world. She could push back the mists. She could feed millions
with the wave of her hand, punish the evil, protect the weak. She was
in awe of herself. The cavern was as if translucent around her, and
she saw the entire world spreading, a magnificent sphere upon which
life could exist only in a small little area at the poles. She could
fix that. She could make things better. She could . . .
She could save
Elend.
She glanced down
and saw him dying. She immediately understood what was wrong with
him. She could fix his damaged skin and sliced organs.
You mustn't do
it, child.
Vin looked up with
shock.
You know what
you must do, the Voice said, whispering to her. It sounded aged.
Kindly.
"I have to
save him!" she cried.
You know what
you must do.
And she did know.
She saw it happen—she saw, as if in a vision, Rashek when he'd
taken the power for himself. She saw the disasters he created.
It was all or
nothing—like Allomancy, in a way. If she took the power, she
would have to burn it away in a few moments. Remaking things as she
pleased, but only for a brief time.
Or . . . she could
give it up.
I must defeat
the Deepness, the Voice said.
She saw that, too.
Outside the palace, in the city, across the land. People in the
mists, shaking, falling. Many stayed indoors, thankfully. The
traditions of the skaa were still strong within them.
Some were out,
however. Those who trusted in Kelsier's words that the mists could
not hurt them. But now the mists could. They had changed, bringing
death.
This was the
Deepness. Mists that killed. Mists that were slowly covering the
entire land. The deaths were sporadic; Vin saw many falling dead, but
saw others simply falling sick, and still others going about in the
mists as if nothing were wrong.
It will get
worse, the Voice said quietly. It will kill and destroy. And,
if you try to stop it yourself, you will ruin the world, as Rashek
did before you.
"Elend . . . "
she whispered. She turned toward him, bleeding on the floor.
At that moment, she
remembered something. Something Sazed had said. You must love him
enough to trust his wishes, he had told her. It isn't love
unless you learn to respect him—not what you assume is
best, but what he actually wants . . . .
She saw Elend
weeping. She saw him focusing on her, and she knew what he wanted. He
wanted his people to live. He wanted the world to know peace, and the
skaa to be free.
He wanted the
Deepness to be defeated. The safety of his people meant more to him
than his own life. Far more.
You'll know what
to do, he'd told her just moments before. I trust you . . . .
Vin closed her
eyes, and tears rolled down her cheeks. Apparently, gods could cry.
"I love you,"
she whispered.
She let the power
go. She held the capacity to become a deity in her hands, and she
gave it away, releasing it to the waiting void. She gave up Elend.
Because she knew
that was what he wanted.
The cavern
immediately began to shake. Vin cried out as the flaring power within
her was ripped away, soaked up greedily by the void. She screamed,
her glow fading, then fell into the now empty pool, head knocking
against the rocks.
The cavern
continued to shake, dust and chips falling from the ceiling. And
then, in a moment of surreal clarity, Vin heard a single, distinct
sentence ringing in her mind.
I am FREE!
. . . for he
must not be allowed to release the thing that is imprisoned there.





59
VIN LAY, QUIETLY,
WEEPING.
The cavern was
still, the tempest over. The thing was gone, and the thumping in her
mind was finally quiet. She sniffled, arms around Elend, holding him
as he gasped his final few breaths. She'd screamed for help, calling
for Ham and Spook, but had gotten no response. They were too far
away.
She felt cold.
Empty. After holding that much power, then having it ripped from her,
she felt like she was nothing. And, once Elend died, she would be.
What would be
the point? she thought. Life doesn't mean anything. I've
betrayed Elend. I've betrayed the world.
She wasn't certain
what had happened, but somehow she'd made a horrible, horrible
mistake. The worst part was, she had tried so hard to do what was
right, even if it hurt.
Something loomed
above her. She looked up at the mist spirit, but couldn't even really
feel rage. She was having trouble feeling anything at the moment.
The spirit raised
an arm, pointing.
"It's over,"
she whispered.
It pointed more
demandingly.
"I won't get
to them in time," she said. "Besides, I saw how bad
the cut was. Saw it with the power. There's nothing any of them could
do, not even Sazed. So, you should be pleased. You got what you
wanted . . . " She trailed off. Why had the spirit stabbed
Elend?
To make me heal
him, she thought. To keep me . . . from releasing the power.
She blinked her
eyes. The spirit waved its arm.
Slowly, numbly, she
got to her feet. She watched the spirit in a trance as it floated a
few steps over and pointed at something on the ground. The room was
dark, now that the pool was empty, and was illuminated only by
Elend's lantern. She had to flare tin to see what the spirit was
pointing at.
A piece of pottery.
The disk Elend had taken from the shelf in the back of the room, and
had been holding in his hand. It had broken when he'd collapsed.
The mist spirit
pointed urgently. Vin approached and bent over, fingers finding the
small nugget of metal that had been at the disk's center.
"What is it?"
she whispered.
The mist spirit
turned and drifted back to Elend. Vin walked up quietly.
He was still alive.
He seemed to be getting weaker, and was trembling less. Eerily, as he
grew closer to death, he actually seemed a bit more in control. He
looked at her as she knelt, and she could see his lips moving.
"Vin . . . "
he whispered.
She knelt beside
him, looked at the bead of metal, then looked up at the spirit. It
stood motionless. She rolled the bead between her fingers, then moved
to eat it.
The spirit moved
urgently, shaking its hands. Vin paused, and the spirit pointed at
Elend.
What? she
thought. However, she wasn't really in a state to think. She held the
nugget up to Elend. "Elend," she whispered, leaning close.
"You must swallow this."
She wasn't certain
if he understood her or not, though he did appear to nod. She placed
the bit of metal in his mouth. His lips moved, but he started to
choke.
I have to get
him something to wash it down, she thought. The only thing she
had was one of her metal vials. She reached into the empty well,
retrieving her earring and her sash. She pulled free a vial, then
poured the liquid into his mouth.
Elend continued to
cough weakly, but the liquid did its work well, washing down the bead
of metal. Vin knelt, feeling so powerless, a depressing contrast to
how she had been just moments before. Elend closed his eyes.
Then, oddly, the
color seemed to return to his cheeks. Vin knelt, confused, watching
him. The look on his face, the way he lay, the color of his skin . .
.
She burned bronze,
and with shock, felt pulses coming from Elend.
He was burning
pewter.





EPILOGUE
TWO WEEKS LATER, A
SOLITARY figure arrived at the Conventical of Seran.
Sazed had left
Luthadel quietly, troubled by his thoughts and by the loss of
Tindwyl. He'd left a note. He couldn't stay in Luthadel. Not at the
moment.
The mists still
killed. They struck random people who went out at night, with no
discernible pattern. Many of the people did not die, but only became
sick. Others, the mists murdered. Sazed didn't know what to make of
the deaths. He wasn't even certain if he cared. Vin spoke of
something terrible she had released at the Well of Ascension. She had
expected Sazed to want to study and record her experience.
Instead, he had
left.
He made his way
through the solemn, steel-plated rooms. He half expected to be
confronted by one Inquisitor or another. Perhaps Marsh would try to
kill him again. By the time he and Ham had returned from the storage
cavern beneath Luthadel, Marsh had vanished again. His work had,
apparently, been done. He'd stalled Sazed long enough to keep him
from stopping Vin.
Sazed made his way
down the steps, through the torture chamber, and finally into the
small rock room he'd visited on his first trip to the Conventical, so
many weeks before. He dropped his pack to the ground, working it open
with tired fingers, then looked up at the large steel plate.
Kwaan's final words
stared back at him. Sazed knelt, pulling a carefully tied portfolio
from his pack. He undid the string, and then removed his original
rubbing, made in this very room months before. He recognized his
fingerprints on the thin paper, knew the strokes of the charcoal to
be his own. He recognized the smudges he had made.
With growing
nervousness, he held the rubbing up and slapped it against the steel
plate on the wall.
And the two did not
match.
Sazed stepped back,
uncertain what to think now that his suspicions had been confirmed.
The rubbing slipped limply from his fingers, and his eyes found the
sentence at the end of the plate. The last sentence, the one that the
mist spirit had ripped free time and time again. The original one on
the steel plate was different from the one Sazed had written and
studied.
Alendi must not
reach the Well of Ascension, Kwaan's ancient words read, for
he must not be allowed to release the thing that is imprisoned there.
Sazed sat down
quietly. It was all a lie, he thought numbly. The religion
of the Terris people . . . the thing the Keepers spent millennia
searching for, trying to understand, was a lie. The so-called
prophecies, the Hero of Ages . . . a fabrication.
A trick.
What better way for
such a creature to gain freedom? Men would die in the name of
prophecies. They wanted to believe, to hope. If
someone—something—could harness that energy, twist it,
what amazing things could be accomplished . . . .
Sazed looked up,
reading the words on the wall, reading the second half once again. It
contained paragraphs that were different from his rubbing.
Or, rather, his
rubbing had been changed somehow. Changed to reflect what the thing
had wished Sazed to read. I write these words in steel,
Kwaan's first words said, for anything not set in metal cannot be
trusted.
Sazed shook his
head. They should have paid attention to that sentence. Everything he
had studied after that had, apparently, been a lie. He looked up at
the plate, scanning its contents, coming to the final section.
And so, they
read, I come to the focus of my argument. I apologize. Even
forcing my words into steel, sitting and scratching in this frozen
cave, I am prone to ramble.
This
is the problem. Though I believed in Alendi at first, I later became
suspicious. It seemed that he fit the signs, true. But, well, how can
I explain this?
Could
it be that he fit them too well?
I
know your argument. We speak of the Anticipation, of things foretold,
of promises made by our greatest prophets of old. Of course the Hero
of Ages will fit the prophecies. He will fit them perfectly. That's
the idea.
And
yet . . . something about all this seems so convenient. It feels
almost as if we constructed a hero to fit our prophecies, rather than
allowing one to arise naturally. This was the worry I had, the thing
that should have given me pause when my brethren came to me, finally
willing to believe.
After
that, I began to see other problems. Some of you may know of my
fabled memory. It is true; I need not a Feruchemist's metalmind to
memorize a sheet of words in an instant. And I tell you, call me
daft, but the words of the prophecies are changing.
The
alterations are slight. Clever, even. A word here, a slight twist
there. But the words on the pages are different from the ones in my
memory. The other Worldbringers scoff at me, for they have their
metalminds to prove to them that the books and prophecies have not
changed.
And
so, this is the great declaration I must make. There is
something—some force—that wants us to believe that the
Hero of Ages has come, and that he must travel to the Well of
Ascension. Something is making the prophecies change so that they
refer to Alendi more perfectly.
And
whatever this power is, it can change words within a Feruchemist's
metalmind.
The
others call me mad. As I have said, that may be true. But must not
even a madman rely on his own mind, his own experience, rather than
that of others? I know what I have memorized. I know what is now
repeated by the other Worldbringers. The two are not the same.
I
sense a craftiness behind these changes, a manipulation subtle and
brilliant. I have spent the last two years in exile, trying to
decipher what the alterations could mean. I have come to only one
conclusion. Something has taken control of our religion, something
nefarious, something that cannot be trusted. It misleads, and it
shadows. It uses Alendi to destroy, leading him along a path of death
and sorrow. It is pulling him toward the Well of Ascension, where the
millennial power has gathered. I can only guess that it sent the
Deepness as a method of making mankind more desperate, of pushing us
to do as it wills.
The
prophecies have changed. They now tell Alendi that he must give up
the power once he takes it. This is not what was once implied by the
texts—they were more vague. And yet, the new version seems to
make it a moral imperative. The texts now outline a terrible
consequence if the Hero of Ages takes the power for himself.
Alendi
believes as they do. He is a good man—despite it all, he is a
good man. A sacrificing man. In truth, all of his actions—all
of the deaths, destructions, and pains that he has caused—have
hurt him deeply. All of these things were, in truth, a kind of
sacrifice for him. He is accustomed to giving up his own will for the
common good, as he sees it.
I
have no doubt that if Alendi reaches the Well of Ascension, he will
take the power and then—in the name of the presumed greater
good—will give it up. Give it away to this same force that has
changed the texts. Give it up to this force of destruction that has
brought him to war, that has tempted him to kill, that has craftily
led him to the north.
This
thing wants the power held in the Well, and it has raped our
religion's holiest tenets in order to get it.
And
so, I have made one final gamble. My pleas, my teachings, my
objections, and even my treasons were all ineffectual. Alendi has
other counselors now, ones who tell him what he wants to hear.
I
have a young nephew, one Rashek. He hates all of Khlennium with the
passion of envious youth. He hates Alendi even more acutely—though
the two have never met—for Rashek feels betrayed that one of
our oppressors should have been chosen as the Hero of Ages.
Alendi
will need guides through the Terris Mountains. I have charged Rashek
with making certain that he and his trusted friends are chosen as
those guides. Rashek is to try and lead Alendi in the wrong
direction, to dissuade him, discourage him, or otherwise foil his
quest. Alendi doesn't know that he has been deceived, that we've all
been deceived, and he will not listen to me now.
If
Rashek fails to lead the trek astray, then I have instructed the lad
to kill Alendi. It is a distant hope. Alendi has survived assassins,
wars, and catastrophes. And yet, I hope that in the frozen mountains
of Terris, he may finally be exposed. I hope for a miracle.
Alendi
must not reach the Well of Ascension, for he must not be allowed to
release the thing that is imprisoned there.
Sazed sat back. It
was the final blow, the last strike that killed whatever was left of
his faith.
He knew at that
moment that he would never believe again.
Vin found Elend
standing on the city wall, looking over the city of Luthadel. He wore
a white uniform, one of the ones that Tindwyl had made for him. He
looked . . . harder than he had just a few weeks before.
"You're
awake," she said, moving up beside him.
He nodded. He
didn't look at her, but continued to watch the city, with its
bustling people. He'd spent quite a bit of time delirious and in bed,
despite the healing power of his newfound Allomancy. Even with
pewter, the surgeons had been uncertain if he'd survive.
He had. And, like a
true Allomancer, he was up and about the first day he was lucid.
"What
happened?" he asked.
She shook her head,
leaning against the stones of the battlement. She could still hear
that terrible, booming voice. I am FREE . . . .
"I'm an
Allomancer," Elend said.
She nodded.
"Mistborn,
apparently," he continued.
"I think . . .
we know where they came from, now," Vin said. "The first
Allomancers."
"What happened
to the power? Ham didn't have a straight answer for me, and all
anyone else knows are rumors."
"I set
something free," she whispered. "Something that shouldn't
have been released; something that led me to the Well. I should never
have gone looking for it, Elend."
Elend stood in
silence, still regarding the city.
She turned, burying
her head in his chest. "It was terrible," she said. "I
could feel that. And I set it free."
Finally, Elend
wrapped his arms around her. "You did the best you could, Vin,"
he said. "In fact, you did the right thing. How could you have
known that everything you'd been told, trained, and prepared to do
was wrong?"
Vin shook her head.
"I am worse than the Lord Ruler. In the end, maybe he realized
he was being tricked, and knew he had to take the power rather than
release it."
"If he'd been
a good man, Vin," Elend said, "he wouldn't have done the
things he did to this land."
"I may have
done far worse," Vin said. "This thing I released . . . the
mists killing people, and coming during the day . . . Elend, what are
we going to do?"
He looked at her
for a moment, then turned back toward the city and its people. "We're
going to do what Kelsier taught us, Vin. We're going to survive."



