

PROLOGUE
MARSH STRUGGLED
TO KILL HIMSELF.
His hand trembled
as he tried to summon the strength to make himself reach up and pull
the spike free from his back and end his monstrous life. He had given
up on trying to break free. Three years. Three years as an
Inquisitor, three years imprisoned in his own thoughts. Those years
had proven that there was no escape. Even now, his mind clouded.
And then It
took control. The world seemed to vibrate around him; then suddenly
he could see clearly. Why had he struggled? Why had he worried? All
was as it should be.
He stepped forward.
Though he could no longer see as normal men did—after all, he
had large steel spikes driven point-first through his eyes—he
could sense the room around him. The spikes protruded from the back
of his skull; if he reached up to touch the back of his head, he
could feel the sharp points. There was no blood.
The spikes gave him
power. Everything was outlined in fine blue Allomantic lines,
highlighting the world. The room was of modest size, and several
companions—also outlined in blue, the Allomantic lines pointing
at the metals contained in their very blood—stood with Marsh.
Each one had spikes through his eyes.
Each one, that is,
except for the man tied to the table in front of him. Marsh smiled,
taking a spike off of the table beside him, then hefting it. His
prisoner wore no gag. That would have stopped the screams.
"Please,"
the prisoner whispered, trembling. Even a Terrisman steward would
break down when confronted by his own violent death. The man
struggled weakly. He was in a very awkward position, as he had been
tied to the table on top of another person. The table had been
designed that way, with depressions to allow for the body underneath.
"What is it
you want?" the Terrisman asked. "I can tell you no more
about the Synod!"
Marsh fingered the
brass spike, feeling its tip. There was work to do, but he hesitated,
relishing the pain and terror in the man's voice. Hesitated so that
he could . . .
Marsh grabbed
control of his own mind. The room's scents lost their sweetness, and
instead reeked with the stench of blood and death. His joy turned to
horror. His prisoner was a Keeper of Terris—a man who had
worked his entire life for the good of others. Killing him would be
not only a crime, but a tragedy. Marsh tried to take command, tried
to force his arm up and around to grab the linchpin spike from his
back—its removal would kill him.
Yet, It
was too strong. The force. Somehow, it had control over Marsh—and
it needed him and the other Inquisitors to be its hands. It was
free—Marsh could still feel it exulting in that—but
something kept it from affecting the world too much by itself. An
opposition. A force that lay over the land like a shield.
It was not
yet complete. It needed more. Something else . . . something hidden.
And Marsh would find that something, bring it to his master. The
master that Vin had freed. The entity that had been imprisoned within
the Well of Ascension.
It called itself
Ruin.
Marsh smiled as his
prisoner began to cry; then he stepped forward, raising the spike in
his hand. He placed it against the whimpering man's chest. The spike
would need to pierce the man's body, passing through the heart, then
be driven into the body of the Inquisitor tied below. Hemalurgy was a
messy art.
That was why it was
so much fun. Marsh picked up a mallet and began to pound.






PART ONE
LEGACY OF THE
SURVIVOR
I am,
unfortunately, the Hero of Ages .





1
FATREN
SQUINTED UP AT THE RED SUN , which hid behind its perpetual
screen of dark haze. Black ash fell lightly from the sky, as it did
most days lately. The thick flakes fell straight, the air stagnant
and hot, without even a hint of a breeze to lighten Fatren's mood. He
sighed, leaning back against the earthen bulwark, looking over
Vetitan. His town.
"How long?"
he asked.
Druffel scratched
his nose. His face was stained black with ash. He hadn't given much
thought to hygiene lately. Of course, considering the stress of the
last few months, Fatren knew that he himself wasn't much to look at
either.
"An hour,
maybe," Druffel said, spitting into the dirt of the bulwark.
Fatren sighed,
staring up at the falling ash. "Do you think it's true, Druffel?
What people are saying?"
"What?"
Druffel asked. "That the world is ending?"
Fatren nodded.
"Don't know,"
Druffel said. "Don't really care."
"How can you
say that?"
Druffel shrugged,
scratching himself. "Soon as those koloss arrive, I'll be dead.
That's pretty much the end of the world for me."
Fatren fell silent.
He didn't like to voice his doubts; he was supposed to be the strong
one. When the lords had left the town—a farming community,
slightly more urban than a northern plantation—Fatren had been
the one who had convinced the skaa to go ahead with their planting.
Fatren had been the one to keep the press gangs away. In a time when
most villages and plantations had lost every able-bodied man to one
army or another, Vetitan still had a working population. It had cost
much of their crops in bribes, but Fatren had kept the people safe.
Mostly.
"The mists
didn't leave until noon today," Fatren said quietly. "They're
staying later and later. You've seen the crops, Druff. They're not
doing well—not enough sunlight, I'd guess. We won't have food
to eat this winter."
"We won't last
'til winter," Druffel said. "Won't last 'til nightfall."
The sad thing—the
thing that was really disheartening—was that Druffel had once
been the optimist. Fatren hadn't heard his brother laugh in months.
That laughter had been Fatren's favorite sound.
Even the Lord
Ruler's mills weren't able to grind Druff's laughter out of him ,
Fatren thought. But these last two years have .
"Fats!" a
voice called. "Fats!"
Fatren looked up as
a young boy scrambled along the side of the bulwark. They'd barely
finished the fortification—it had been Druffel's idea, back
before he'd really given up. Their town contained some seven thousand
people, which made it fairly large. It had taken a great deal of work
to surround the entire thing with a defensive mound.
Fatren had barely a
thousand real soldiers—it had been very hard to gather that
many from such a small population—with maybe another thousand
men who were too young, too old, or too unskilled to fight well. He
didn't really know how big the koloss army was, but it was bound to
be larger than two thousand. A bulwark was going to be of very little
use.
The boy—Sev—finally
puffed up to Fatren. "Fats!" Sev said. "Someone's
coming!"
"Already?"
Fatren asked. "Druff said the koloss were still a while away!"
"Not a koloss,
Fats," the boy said. "A man. Come see!"
Fatren turned to
Druff, who wiped his nose and shrugged. They followed Sev around the
inside of the bulwark, toward the front gate. Ash and dust swirled on
the packed earth, piling in corners, drifting. There hadn't been much
time for cleaning lately. The women had to work the fields while the
men trained and made war preparations.
War preparations.
Fatren told himself that he had a force of two thousand "soldiers,"
but what he really had were a thousand skaa peasants with swords.
They'd had two years of training, true, but they had very little real
fighting experience.
A group of men
clustered around the front gates, standing on the bulwark or leaning
against its side. Maybe I was wrong to spend so much of our
resources training soldiers, Fatren thought. If those
thousand men had worked the mines instead, we'd have some ore for
bribes.
Except, koloss
didn't take bribes. They just killed. Fatren shuddered, thinking of
Garthwood. That city had been bigger than his own, but fewer than a
hundred survivors had made their way to Vetitan. That had been three
months ago. He'd hoped, irrationally, that the koloss would be
satisfied with destroying that city.
He should have
known better. Koloss were never satisfied.
Fatren climbed up
to the top of the bulwark, and soldiers in patched clothing and bits
of leather made way for him. He peered through the falling ash across
a dark landscape that looked as if it were blanketed in deep black
snow.
A lone rider
approached, wearing a dark, hooded cloak.
"What do you
think, Fats?" one of the soldiers asked. "Koloss scout?"
Fatren snorted.
"Koloss wouldn't send a scout, especially not a human one."
"He has a
horse," Druffel said with a grunt. "We could use another of
those." The city only had five. All were suffering from
malnutrition.
"Merchant,"
one of the soldiers said.
"No wares,"
Fatren said. "And it would take a brave merchant to travel these
parts alone."
"I've never
seen a refugee with a horse," one of the men said. He raised a
bow, looking at Fatren.
Fatren shook his
head. Nobody fired as the stranger rode up, moving at an unhurried
pace. He stopped his mount directly before the city gates. Fatren was
proud of those. Real, true wooden gates mounted in the earthen
bulwark. He'd gotten both wood and fine stone from the lord's manor
at the city center.
Very little of the
stranger was visible beneath the thick, dark cloak he wore to protect
himself from the ash. Fatren looked over the top of the bulwark,
studying the stranger, and then he glanced up at his brother,
shrugging. The ash fell silently.
The stranger leaped
from his horse.
He shot straight
upward, as if propelled from beneath, cloak whipping free as he
soared. Underneath it, he wore a uniform of brilliant white.
Fatren cursed,
jumping backward as the stranger crested the top of the bulwark and
landed on the top of the wooden gate itself. The man was an
Allomancer. A nobleman. Fatren had hoped those would all stick to
their squabbles in the North and leave his people in peace.
Or, at least, their
peaceful deaths.
The newcomer
turned. He wore a short beard, and had his dark hair shorn close.
"All right, men," he said, striding across the top of the
gate with an unnatural sense of balance, "we don't have much
time. Let's get to work." He stepped off the gate onto the
bulwark. Immediately, Druffel pulled his sword on the newcomer.
The sword jerked
from Druffel's hand, yanked into the air by an unseen force. The
stranger snatched the weapon as it passed his head. He flipped the
sword around, inspecting it. "Good steel," he said,
nodding. "I'm impressed. How many of your soldiers are this well
equipped?" He flipped the weapon in his hand, handing it back
toward Druffel hilt-first.
Druffel glanced at
Fatren, confused.
"Who are
you, stranger?" Fatren demanded with as much courage as he could
muster. He didn't know a lot about Allomancy, but he was pretty
certain this man was Mistborn. The stranger could probably kill
everyone atop the bulwark with barely a thought.
The stranger
ignored the question, turning to scan the city. "This bulwark
goes around the entire perimeter of the city?" he asked, turning
toward one of the soldiers.
"Um . . . yes,
my lord," the man said.
"How many
gates are there?"
"Just the one,
my lord."
"Open the gate
and bring my horse in," the newcomer said. "I assume you
have stables?"
"Yes, my
lord," the soldier said.
Well ,
Fatren thought with dissatisfaction as the soldier ran off, this
newcomer certainly knows how to command people . Fatren's
soldier didn't even pause to think that he was obeying a stranger
without asking for permission. Fatren could already see the other
soldiers straightening a bit, losing their wariness. This newcomer
talked like he expected to be obeyed, and the soldiers were
responding. This wasn't a nobleman like the ones Fatren had known
back when he was a household servant at the lord's manor. This man
was different.
The stranger
continued his contemplation of the city. Ash fell on his beautiful
white uniform, and Fatren thought it a shame to see the garment being
dirtied. The newcomer nodded to himself, then began to walk down the
side of the bulwark.
"Wait,"
Fatren said, causing the stranger to pause. "Who are you?"
The newcomer
turned, meeting Fatren's eyes. "My name is Elend Venture. I'm
your emperor."
With that, the man
turned and continued down the embankment. The soldiers made way for
him; then many of them followed behind.
Fatren glanced at
his brother.
"Emperor?"
Druffel muttered, then spat.
Fatren agreed with
the sentiment. What to do? He'd never fought an Allomancer before; he
wasn't even certain how to begin. The "emperor" had
certainly disarmed Druffel easily enough.
"Organize the
people of the city," the stranger—Elend Venture—said
from ahead. "The koloss will come from the north—they'll
ignore the gate, climbing over the bulwark. I want the children and
the elderly concentrated in the southernmost part of the city. Pack
them together in as few buildings as possible."
"What good
will that do?" Fatren demanded. He hurried after the
"emperor"—he didn't really see any other option.
"The koloss
are most dangerous when they're in a blood frenzy," Venture
said, continuing to walk. "If they do take the city, then you
want them to spend as long as possible searching for your people. If
the koloss frenzy wears off while they search, they'll grow
frustrated and turn to looting. Then your people might be able to
sneak away without being chased."
Venture paused,
then turned to meet Fatren's eyes. The stranger's expression was
grim. "It's a slim hope. But, it's something." With that,
he resumed his pace, walking down the city's main thoroughfare.
From behind, Fatren
could hear the soldiers whispering. They'd all heard of a man named
Elend Venture. He was the one who had seized power in Luthadel after
the Lord Ruler's death over two years before. News from up north was
scarce and unreliable, but most of it mentioned Venture. He had
fought off all rivals to the throne, even killing his own father.
He'd hidden his nature as a Mistborn, and was supposedly married to
the very woman who had slain the Lord Ruler. Fatren doubted that such
an important man—one who was likely more legend than fact—had
made his way to such a humble city in the Southern Dominance,
especially unaccompanied. Even the mines weren't worth much anymore.
The stranger had to be lying.
But . . . he was
obviously an Allomancer . . .
Fatren hurried to
keep up with the stranger. Venture—or whoever he was—paused
in front of a large structure near the center of the city. The old
offices of the Steel Ministry. Fatren had ordered the doors and
windows boarded up.
"You found the
weapons in there?" Venture asked, turning toward Fatren.
Fatren stood for a
moment. Then, finally, shook his head. "From the lord's
mansion."
"He left
weapons behind?" Venture asked with surprise.
"We think he
intended to come back for them," Fatren said. "The soldiers
he left eventually deserted, joining a passing army. They took what
they could carry. We scavenged the rest."
Venture nodded to
himself, rubbing his bearded chin in thought as he stared at the old
Ministry building. It was tall and ominous, despite—or perhaps
because of—its disuse. "Your men look well trained. I
didn't expect that. Do any of them have battle experience?"
Druffel snorted
quietly, indicating that he thought this stranger had no business
being so nosy.
"Our men have
fought enough to be dangerous, stranger," Fatren said. "Some
bandits thought to take rule of the city from us. They assumed we
were weak, and would be easily cowed."
If the stranger saw
the words as a threat, he didn't show it. He simply nodded. "Have
any of you fought koloss?"
Fatren shared a
look with Druffel. "Men who fight koloss don't live, stranger,"
he finally said.
"If that were
true," Venture said, "I'd be dead a dozen times over."
He turned to face the growing crowd of soldiers and townspeople.
"I'll teach you what I can about fighting koloss, but we don't
have much time. I want captains and squad leaders organized at the
city gate in ten minutes. Regular soldiers are to form up in ranks
along the bulwark—I'll teach the squad leaders and captains a
few tricks, then they can carry the tips to their men."
Some of the
soldiers moved, but—to their credit—most of them stayed
where they were. The newcomer didn't seem offended that his orders
weren't obeyed. He stood quietly, staring down the armed crowd. He
didn't seem frightened, nor did he seem angry or disapproving. He
just seemed . . . regal.
"My lord,"
one of the soldier captains finally asked. "Did you . . . bring
an army with you to help us?"
"I brought
two, actually," Venture said. "But we don't have time to
wait for them." He met Fatren's eyes. "You wrote and asked
for my help. And, as your liege, I've come to give it. Do you still
want it?"
Fatren frowned.
He'd never asked this man—or any lord—for help. He opened
his mouth to object, but paused. He'll let me pretend that I sent
for him, Fatren thought. Act like this was part of the plan
all along. I could give up rule here without looking like a failure.
We're going to
die. But, looking into this man's eyes, I can almost believe that we
have a chance .
"I . . .
didn't expect you to come alone, my lord," Fatren found himself
saying. "I was surprised to see you."
Venture nodded.
"That is understandable. Come, let's talk tactics while your
soldiers gather."
"Very well,"
Fatren said. As he stepped forward, however, Druffel caught his arm.
"What are you
doing?" his brother hissed. "You sent for this
man? I don't believe it."
"Gather the
soldiers, Druff," Fatren said.
Druffel stood for a
moment, then swore quietly and stalked away. He didn't look like he
had any intention of gathering the soldiers, so Fatren waved for two
of his captains to do it. That done, he joined Venture, and the two
walked back toward the gates, Venture ordering a few soldiers to walk
ahead of them and keep people back so that he and Fatren could speak
more privately. Ash continued to fall from the sky, dusting the
street black, clustering atop the city's stooped, one-story
buildings.
"Who are you?"
Fatren asked quietly.
"I am who I
said," Venture said.
"I don't
believe you."
"But you trust
me," Venture said.
"No. I just
don't want to argue with an Allomancer."
"That's good
enough, for now," Venture said. "Look, friend, you have ten
thousand koloss marching on your city. You need whatever help
you can get."
Ten thousand?
Fatren thought, feeling stupefied.
"You're in
charge of this city, I assume?" Venture asked.
Fatren shook out of
his stupor. "Yes," he said. "My name is Fatren."
"All right,
Lord Fatren, we—"
"I'm no lord,"
Fatren said.
"Well, you
just became one," Venture said. "You can choose a surname
later. Now, before we continue, you need to know my conditions for
helping you."
"What kind of
conditions?"
"The
nonnegotiable kind," Venture said. "If we win, you'll swear
fealty to me."
Fatren frowned,
stopping in the street. Ash fell around him. "So that's it? You
saunter in before a fight, claiming to be some high lord, so you can
take credit for our victory? Why should I swear fealty to a man I
only met a few minutes before?"
"Because if
you don't," Venture said quietly, "I'll just take command
anyway." Then he continued to walk.
Fatren stood for a
moment; then he rushed forward and caught up to Venture. "Oh, I
see. Even if we survive this battle, we'll end up ruled by a tyrant."
"Yes,"
Venture said.
Fatren frowned. He
hadn't expected the man to be so blunt.
Venture shook his
head, regarding the city through the falling ash. "I used to
think that I could do things differently. And, I still believe that
I'll be able to, someday. But, for now, I don't have a choice. I need
your soldiers and I need your city."
"My city?"
Fatren asked, frowning. "Why?"
Venture held up a
finger. "We have to survive this battle first," he said.
"We'll get to other things later."
Fatren paused, and
was surprised to realize that he did trust the stranger. He
couldn't have explained exactly why he felt that way. This was simply
a man to follow—a leader such as Fatren had always wanted to
be.
Venture didn't wait
for Fatren to agree to the "conditions." It wasn't an
offer, but an ultimatum. Fatren hurried to catch up again as Venture
entered the small square in front of the city gates. Soldiers bustled
about. None of them wore uniforms—their only method of
distinguishing a captain from a regular soldier was a red band tied
around the arm. Venture hadn't given them much time to gather—but,
then, they all knew the city was about to be attacked. They had been
gathered anyway.
"Time is
short," Venture repeated in a loud voice. "I can teach you
only a few things, but they will make a difference.
"Koloss range
in size from small ones that are about five feet tall to the huge
ones, which are about twelve feet tall. However, even the little ones
are going to be stronger than you are. Expect that. Fortunately, the
creatures fight without coordination between individuals. If a
koloss's comrade is in trouble, he won't bother to help.
"They attack
directly, without guile, and try to use blunt force to overwhelm.
Don't let them! Tell your men to gang up on individual koloss—two
men for the small ones, three or four for the big ones. We won't be
able to maintain a very large front, but that will keep us alive the
longest.
"Don't worry
about creatures that get around our line and enter the city—we'll
have the civilians hidden at the very back of your town, and the
koloss who bypass our line might turn to pillaging, leaving others to
fight alone. That's what we want! Don't chase them down into the
city. Your families will be safe.
"If you're
fighting a big koloss, attack the legs, bring it down before you go
for the kill. If you're fighting a small one, make certain your sword
or spear doesn't get caught in their loose skin. Understand that
koloss aren't stupid—they're just unsophisticated. Predictable.
They'll come at you the easiest way possible, and attack only in the
most direct manner.
"The most
important thing for you to understand is that they can be
beaten. We'll do it today. Don't let yourselves become intimidated!
Fight with coordination, keep your heads, and I promise you that we
will survive."
The soldier
captains stood in a small cluster, looking at Venture. They didn't
cheer at the speech, but they did seem a little more confident. They
moved off to pass on Venture's instructions to their men.
Fatren approached
the emperor quietly. "If your count is correct, they outnumber
us five to one."
Venture nodded.
"They're
bigger, stronger, and better trained than we are."
Venture nodded
again.
"We're doomed,
then."
Venture finally
looked at Fatren, frowning, black ash dusting his shoulders. "You're
not doomed. You have something they don't—something very
important."
"What's that?"
Venture met his
eyes. "You have me."
"My lord
emperor!" a voice called from atop the bulwark. "Koloss
sighted!"
They already
call to him first , Fatren thought. Fatren wasn't certain
whether to be insulted or impressed.
Venture immediately
jumped up to the top of the bulwark, using his Allomancy to cross the
distance in a quick bound. Most of the soldiers stooped or hid behind
the top of the fortification, keeping a low profile despite the
distance of their enemies. Venture, however, stood proud in his white
cape and uniform, shading his eyes, squinting toward the horizon.
"They're
setting up camp," he said, smiling. "Good. Lord Fatren,
prepare the men for an assault."
"An assault?"
Fatren asked, scrambling up behind Venture.
The emperor nodded.
"The koloss will be tired from marching, and will be distracted
by making camp. We'll never have a better opportunity to attack
them."
"But, we're on
the defensive!"
Venture shook his
head. "If we wait, they'll eventually whip themselves into a
blood frenzy, then come against us. We need to attack, rather than
just wait to be slaughtered."
"And abandon
the bulwark?"
"The
fortification is impressive, Lord Fatren, but ultimately useless. You
don't have the numbers to defend the entire perimeter, and the koloss
are generally taller and more stable than men. They'll just take the
bulwark from you, then hold the high ground as they push down into
the city."
"But—"
Venture looked at
him. His eyes were calm, but his gaze was firm and expectant. The
message was simple. I am in charge now. There would be no
more arguing.
"Yes, my
lord," Fatren said, calling over messengers to pass the orders.
Venture stood
watching as the messenger boys dashed off. There seemed to be some
confusion among the men—they weren't expecting to attack. More
and more eyes turned toward Venture, standing tall atop the bulwark.
He really does
look like an emperor , Fatren thought despite himself.
The orders moved
down the line. Time passed. Finally, the entire army was watching.
Venture pulled out his sword and held it high in the ash-scattered
sky. Then, he took off down the bulwark in an inhumanly quick dash,
charging toward the koloss camp.
For a moment, he
ran alone. Then, surprising himself, Fatren gritted his teeth against
shaking nerves and followed.
The bulwark
exploded with motion, the soldiers charging with a collective yell,
running toward death with their weapons held high.

Holding the
power did strange things to my mind. In just a few moments, I became
familiar with the power itself, with its history, and with the ways
it might be used .
Yet, this
knowledge was different from experience, or even ability to use that
power. For instance, I knew how to move a planet in the sky. Yet, I
didn't know where to place it so that it wouldn't be too close, or
too far, from the sun .





2
AS ALWAYS,
TENSOON'S DAY began in darkness. Part of that was due, of
course, to the fact that he didn't have any eyes. He could have
created a set—he was of the Third Generation, which was old,
even for a kandra. He had digested enough corpses that he had learned
how to create sensory organs intuitively without a model to copy.
Unfortunately, eyes
would have done him little good. He didn't have a skull, and he had
found that most organs didn't function well without a full body—and
skeleton—to support them. His own mass would crush eyes if he
moved the wrong way, and it would be very difficult to turn them
about to see.
Not that there
would be anything to look at. TenSoon moved his bulk slightly,
shifting inside his prison chamber. His body was little more than a
grouping of translucent muscles—like a mass of large snails or
slugs, all connected, somewhat more malleable than the body of a
mollusk. With concentration, he could dissolve one of the muscles and
either meld it with another one, or make something new. Yet, without
a skeleton to use, he was all but impotent.
He shifted in his
cell again. His very skin had a sense of its own—a kind of
taste. Right now, it tasted the stench of his own excrement on the
sides of the chamber, but he didn't dare turn off this sense. It was
one of his only connections to the world around him.
The "cell"
was actually nothing more than a grate-covered stone pit. It was
barely large enough to hold his mass. His captors dumped food in from
the top, then periodically poured water in to hydrate him and wash
his excrement out through a small drainage hole at the bottom. Both
this hole and those in the locked grate above were too small for him
to slide through—a kandra's body was supple, but even a pile of
muscles could be squeezed only so small.
Most people would
have gone mad from the stress of being so confined for . . . he
didn't even know how long it had been. Months? But TenSoon
had the Blessing of Presence. His mind would not give in easily.
Sometimes he cursed
the Blessing for keeping him from the blissful relief of madness.
Focus , he
told himself. He had no brain, not as humans did, but he was able to
think. He didn't understand this. He wasn't certain if any kandra
did. Perhaps those of the First Generation knew more—but if so,
they didn't enlighten everyone else.
They can't keep
you here forever , he told himself. The First Contract says
. . .
But he was
beginning to doubt the First Contract—or, rather, that the
First Generation paid any attention to it. But, could he blame them?
TenSoon was a Contract-breaker. By his own admission, he had gone
against the will of his master, helping another instead. This
betrayal had ended with his master's death.
Yet, even such a
shameful act was the least of his crimes. The punishment for
Contract-breaking was death, and if TenSoon's crimes had stopped
there, the others would have killed him and been done with it.
Unfortunately, there was much more at stake. TenSoon's
testimony—given to the Second Generation in a closed
conference—had revealed a much more dangerous, much more
important, lapse.
TenSoon had
betrayed his people's secret.
They can't
execute me , he thought, using the idea to keep him focused. Not
until they find out who I told .
The secret. The
precious, precious secret.
I've doomed us
all. My entire people. We'll be slaves again. No, we're already
slaves. We'll become something else—automatons, our minds
controlled by others. Captured and used, our bodies no longer our own
.
This was what he
had done—what he had potentially set in motion. The reason he
deserved imprisonment and death. And yet, he wished to live. He
should despise himself. But, for some reason, he still felt he had
done the right thing.
He shifted again,
masses of slick muscle rotating around one another. Midshift,
however, he froze. Vibrations. Someone was coming.
He arranged
himself, pushing his muscles to the sides of the pit, forming a
depression in the middle of his body. He needed to catch all of the
food that he could—they fed him precious little. However, no
slop came pouring down through the grate. He waited, expectant, until
the grate unlocked. Though he had no ears, he could feel the coarse
vibrations as the grate was dragged back, its rough iron finally
dropped against the floor above.
What?
Hooks came next.
They looped around his muscles, grabbing him and ripping his flesh as
they pulled him out of the pit. It hurt. Not just the hooks, but the
sudden freedom as his body was spilled across the floor of the
prison. He unwillingly tasted dirt and dried slop. His muscles
quivered, the unfettered motion of being outside the cell felt
strange, and he strained, moving his bulk in ways that he had nearly
forgotten.
Then it came. He
could taste it in the air. Acid, thick and pungent, presumably in a
gold-lined bucket brought by the prison keepers. They were going to
kill him after all.
But, they
can't! he thought. The First Contract, the law of our
people, it—
Something fell on
him. Not acid, but something hard. He touched it eagerly, muscles
moving against one another, tasting it, testing it, feeling it. It
was round, with holes, and several sharp edges . . . a skull.
The acid stink grew
sharper. Were they stirring it? TenSoon moved quickly, forming around
the skull, filling it. He already had some dissolved flesh stored
inside of an organ-like pouch. He brought this out, oozing it around
the skull, quickly making skin. He left the eyes alone, working on
lungs, forming a tongue, ignoring lips for the moment. He worked with
a sense of desperation as the taste of acid grew strong, and then . .
.
It hit him. It
seared the muscles on one side of his body, washing over his bulk,
dissolving it. Apparently, the Second Generation had given up on
getting his secrets from him. However, before killing him, they knew
they had to give him an opportunity to speak. The First Contract
required it—hence the skull. However, the guards obviously had
orders to kill him before he could actually say anything in his
defense. They followed the form of the law, yet at the very same time
they ignored its intent.
They didn't
realize, however, how quickly TenSoon could work. Few kandra had
spent as much time on Contracts as he had—all of the Second
Generation, and most of the Third, had long ago retired from service.
They led easy lives here in the Homeland.
An easy life taught
one very little.
Most kandra took
hours to form a body—some younger ones needed days. In seconds,
however, TenSoon had a rudimentary tongue. As the acid moved up his
body, he forced out a trachea, inflated a lung, and croaked out a
single word:
"Judgment!"
The pouring
stopped. His body continued to burn. He worked through the pain,
forming primitive hearing organs inside the skull cavity.
A voice whispered
nearby. "Fool."
"Judgment!"
TenSoon said again.
"Accept
death," the voice hissed quietly. "Do not put yourself in a
position to cause further harm to our people. The First Generation
has granted you this chance to die because of your years of extra
service!"
TenSoon paused. A
trial would be public. So far, only a select few knew the extent of
his betrayal. He could die, cursed as a Contract-breaker but
retaining some measure of respect for his prior career.
Somewhere—likely in a pit in this very room—there were
some who suffered endless captivity, a torture that would eventually
break even the minds of those endowed with the Blessing of Presence.
Did he want to
become one of those? By revealing his actions in an open forum, he
would earn himself an eternity of pain. Forcing a trial would be
foolish, for there was no hope of vindication. His confessions had
already damned him.
If he spoke, it
would not be to defend himself. It would be for other reasons
entirely.
"Judgment,"
he repeated, this time barely whispering.

In some ways,
having such power was too overwhelming, I think. This was a power
that would take millennia to understand. Remaking the world would
have been easy, had one been familiar with the power. Yet, I realized
the danger inherent in my ignorance. Like a child suddenly given
awesome strength, I could have pushed too hard, and left the world a
broken toy I could never repair .





3
ELEND
VENTURE, SECOND EMPEROR of the Final Empire, had not been
born a warrior. He'd been born a nobleman—which, in the Lord
Ruler's day, had essentially made Elend a professional socialite.
He'd spent his youth learning to play the frivolous games of the
Great Houses, living the pampered lifestyle of the imperial elite.
It wasn't odd for
him to have ended up a politician. He'd always been interested in
political theory, and while he'd been more a scholar than a true
statesman, he'd known that someday he'd rule his house. Yet, he
hadn't made a very good king at first. He hadn't understood that
there was more to leadership than good ideas and honest intentions.
Far more.
I doubt you
will ever be the type of leader who can lead a charge against the
enemy, Elend Venture . The words had been spoken by Tindwyl—the
woman who'd trained him in practical politics. Remembering those
words made Elend smile as his soldiers crashed into the koloss camp.
Elend flared
pewter. A warm sensation—now familiar to him—burst to
life in his chest, and his muscles became taut with extra strength
and energy. He'd swallowed the metal earlier, so that he could draw
upon its powers for the battle. He was an Allomancer. That still awed
him sometimes.
As he'd predicted,
the koloss were surprised by the attack. They stood motionless for a
few moments, shocked—even though they must have seen Elend's
newly recruited army as it charged. Koloss had trouble dealing with
the unexpected. They found it hard to comprehend a group of weak,
outnumbered humans attacking their camp. So, it took them time to
adjust.
Elend's army made
good use of that time. Elend himself struck first, flaring his pewter
to give himself yet more power as he cut down the first koloss. It
was a smaller beast. Like all of its kind, it was human-like in form,
though it had oversized, drooping blue skin that seemed detached from
the rest of its body. Its beady red eyes showed a bit of inhuman
surprise as it died, Elend yanking his sword from its chest.
"Strike
quickly!" he yelled as more koloss turned from their firepits.
"Kill as many as you can before they frenzy!"
His
soldiers—terrified, but committed—charged in around him,
overrunning the first few groups of koloss. The "camp" was
little more than a place where the koloss had tromped down ash and
the plants beneath, then dug firepits. Elend could see his men
growing more confident at their initial success, and he encouraged
them by Pulling on their emotions with Allomancy, making them braver.
He was more comfortable with this form of Allomancy—he still
hadn't quite gotten the hang of leaping about with metals the way Vin
did. Emotions, however—those he understood.
Fatren, the city's
burly leader, stuck near Elend as he led a group of soldiers toward a
large pack of koloss. Elend kept an eye on the man. Fatren was the
ruler of this small city; if he died, it would be a blow to morale.
Together, they rushed a small group of surprised koloss. The largest
beast in that group was some eleven feet tall. Like that of all large
koloss, this creature's skin—once loose—was now pulled
tight around its oversized body. Koloss never stopped growing, but
their skin always remained the same size. On the younger creatures,
it hung loose and folded. On the big ones, it stretched and ripped.
Elend burned steel,
then threw a handful of coins into the air in front of him. He Pushed
on the coins, throwing his weight against them, spraying them at the
koloss. The beasts were too tough to fall to simple coins with any
reliability, but the bits of metal would injure and weaken them.
As the coins flew,
Elend charged the large koloss. The beast pulled a huge sword off its
back, and it seemed elated at the prospect of a fight.
The koloss swung
first, and it had an awesome reach. Elend had to jump backward—pewter
making him more nimble. Koloss swords were massive, brutish things,
so blunt they were almost clubs. The force of the blow shook the air;
Elend wouldn't have had a chance to turn the blade aside, even with
pewter helping him. In addition, the sword—or, more accurately,
the koloss holding it—weighed so much that Elend wouldn't be
able to use Allomancy to Push it out of the creature's hands. Pushing
with steel was all about weight and force. If Elend Pushed on
something heavier than himself, he'd be thrown backward.
So, Elend had to
rely on the extra speed and dexterity of pewter. He threw himself out
of his dodge, dashing to the side, watching for a backhand. The
creature turned, silent, eyeing Elend, but didn't strike. It hadn't
quite frenzied yet.
Elend stared down
his oversized enemy. How did I get here? he thought, not for
the first time. I'm a scholar, not a warrior. Half the time
he thought he had no business leading men at all.
The other half the
time, he figured that he thought too much. He ducked forward,
striking. The koloss anticipated the move, and tried to bring its
weapon down on Elend's head. Elend, however, reached out and Pulled
on the sword of another koloss—throwing that creature off
balance and allowing two of Elend's men to slay it, and also Pulling
Elend himself to the side. He just barely evaded his opponent's
weapon. Then, as he spun in the air, he flared pewter and struck from
the side.
He sheared
completely through the beast's leg at the knee, toppling it to the
ground. Vin always said that Elend's Allomantic power was unusually
strong. Elend wasn't certain about that—he didn't have much
experience with Allomancy—but the force of his own swing did
send him stumbling. He managed to regain his footing, however, and
then took off the creature's head.
Several of the
soldiers were staring at him. His white uniform was now sprayed with
bright red koloss blood. It wasn't the first time. Elend took a deep
breath as he heard inhuman screams sounding through the camp. The
frenzy was beginning.
"Form up!"
Elend shouted. "Make lines, stay together, prepare for the
assault!"
The soldiers
responded slowly. They were far less disciplined than the troops
Elend was accustomed to, but they did an admirable job of bunching up
at his command. Elend glanced across the ground before them. They'd
managed to take down several hundred koloss—an amazing feat.
The easy part,
however, was over.
"Stay firm!"
Elend yelled, running down in front of the soldier line. "But
keep fighting! We need to kill as many of them as quickly as
possible! Everything depends on this! Give them your fury,
men!"
He burned brass and
Pushed on their emotions, Soothing away their fear. An Allomancer
couldn't control minds—not human minds, at least—but he
could encourage some emotions while discouraging others.
Again, Vin said that Elend was able to affect far more people than
should have been possible. Elend had gained his powers recently,
directly from a place he now suspected was the original source of
Allomancy.
Under the influence
of the Soothing, his soldiers stood up straight. Again, Elend felt a
healthy respect for these simple skaa. He was giving them bravery and
taking away some of their fear, but the determination was their own.
These were good people.
With luck, he'd be
able to save some of them.
The koloss
attacked. As he'd hoped, a large group of the creatures broke away
from the main camp and charged toward the village. Some of the
soldiers cried out, but they were too busy defending themselves to
follow. Elend threw himself into the fray whenever the line wobbled,
shoring up the weak point. As he did so, he burned brass and tried to
Push on the emotions of a nearby koloss.
Nothing happened.
The creatures were resistant to emotional Allomancy, particularly
when they were already being manipulated by someone else. However,
when he did break through, he could take complete control of
them. That, required time, luck, and a determination to fight
tirelessly.
And so, he did. He
fought alongside the men, watching them die, killing koloss as his
line bent at the edges, forming a half circle to keep his troops from
being surrounded. Even so, the fighting was grim. As more and more
koloss frenzied and charged, the odds quickly turned against Elend's
group. Still, the koloss resisted his emotional manipulation. But
they were getting closer . . .
"We're
doomed!" Fatren screamed.
Elend turned, a bit
surprised to see the beefy lord beside him and still alive. The men
continued to fight. Only about fifteen minutes had passed since the
start of the frenzy, but the line was already beginning to buckle.
A speck appeared in
the sky.
"You've led us
to die!" Fatren yelled. He was covered in koloss blood, though a
patch on his shoulder looked to be his own. "Why?" Fatren
demanded.
Elend simply
pointed as the speck grew larger.
"What is it?"
Fatren asked over the chaos of battle.
Elend smiled. "The
first of those armies I promised you."
Vin fell from the
sky in a tempest of horseshoes, landing directly at the center of the
koloss army.
Without hesitating,
she used Allomancy to Push a pair of horseshoes toward a turning
koloss. One took the creature in the forehead, throwing it backward,
and the other shot over its head, hitting another koloss. Vin spun,
flipping out another shoe, shooting it past a particularly large
beast and taking down a smaller koloss behind him.
She flared iron,
Pulling that horseshoe back, catching it around the larger koloss's
wrist. Immediately, her Pull yanked her toward the beast—but it
also threw the creature off balance. Its massive iron sword dropped
to the ground as Vin hit the creature in the chest. Then, she Pushed
off the fallen sword, throwing herself upward in a backward flip as
another koloss swung at her.
She shot some
fifteen feet into the air. The sword missed, cutting off the head of
the koloss beneath her. The koloss who had swung didn't seem to mind
that it had killed a comrade; it just looked up at her, bloodred eyes
hateful.
Vin Pulled on the
fallen sword. It lurched up at her, but also pulled her down with its
weight. She caught it as she fell—the sword was nearly as tall
as she was, but flared pewter let her handle it with ease—and
she sheared free the attacking koloss's arm as she landed.
She took its legs
off at the knees, then left it to die as she spun toward other
opponents. As always, the koloss seemed fascinated—in an
enraged, baffled way—with Vin. They associated large size with
danger and had difficulty understanding how a small woman like
Vin—twenty years old, barely over five feet in height and
slight as a willow—could pose a threat. Yet, they saw her kill,
and this drew them to her.
Vin was just fine
with that.
She screamed as she
attacked, if only to add some sound to the too-silent battlefield.
Koloss tended to stop yelling as they entered their frenzy, growing
focused only on killing. She threw out a handful of coins, Pushing
them toward the group behind her, then jumped forward, Pulling on a
sword.
A koloss in front
of her stumbled. She landed on its back, attacking a creature beside
it. This one fell, and Vin rammed her sword down into the back of the
one below her. She Pushed herself to the side, Pulling on the sword
of the dying koloss. She caught this weapon, cut down a third beast,
then threw the sword, Pushing it like a giant arrow into the chest of
a fourth monster. That same Push threw her backward out of the way of
an attack. She grabbed the sword from the back of the one she'd
stabbed before, ripping the weapon free even as the creature died.
And, in one fluid stroke, she slammed it down through the collarbone
and chest of a fifth beast.
She landed. Koloss
fell dead around her.
Vin was not fury.
She was not terror. She had grown beyond those things. She had seen
Elend die—had held him in her arms as he did—and had
known that she had let it happen. Intentionally.
And yet, he still
lived. Every breath was unexpected, perhaps undeserved. Once, she'd
been terrified that she would fail him. But, she had found
peace—somehow—in understanding that she couldn't keep him
from risking his life. In understanding that she didn't want
to keep him from risking his life.
So, she no longer
fought out of fear for the man she loved. Instead, she fought with an
understanding. She was a knife—Elend's knife, the Final
Empire's knife. She didn't fight to protect one man, but to protect
the way of life he had created, and the people he struggled so hard
to defend.
Peace gave her
strength.
Koloss died around
her, and scarlet blood—too bright to be human—stained the
air. There were ten thousand in this army—far too many for her
to kill. However, she didn't need to slaughter every koloss in the
army.
She just had to
make them afraid.
Because, despite
what she'd once assumed, koloss could feel fear. She saw it
building in the creatures around her, hidden beneath frustration and
rage. A koloss attacked her, and she dodged to the side, moving with
pewter's enhanced speed. She slammed a sword into its back as she
moved, and spun, noticing a massive creature pushing its way through
the army toward her.
Perfect ,
she thought. It was big—perhaps the biggest one she had ever
seen. It had to be almost thirteen feet tall. Heart failure should
have killed it long ago, and its skin was ripped half free, hanging
in wide flaps.
It bellowed, the
sound echoing across the oddly quiet battlefield. Vin smiled, then
burned duralumin. Immediately, the pewter already burning inside of
her exploded to give her a massive, instantaneous burst of strength.
Duralumin, when used with another metal, amplified that second metal
and made it burn out in a single burst, giving up all of its power at
once.
Vin burned steel,
then Pushed outward in all directions. Her duralumin-enhanced Push
crashed like a wave into the swords of the creatures running at her.
Weapons ripped free, koloss were thrown backward, and massive bodies
scattered like mere flakes of ash beneath the bloodred sun.
Duralumin-enhanced pewter kept her from being crushed as she did
this.
Her pewter and
steel both disappeared, burned away in single flash of power. She
pulled out a small vial of liquid—an alcohol solution with
metal flakes—and downed it in a single gulp, restoring her
metals. Then, she burned pewter and leaped over fallen, disoriented
koloss toward the massive creature she had seen earlier. A smaller
koloss tried to stop her, but she caught its arm by the wrist, then
twisted, breaking the joint. She took the creature's sword, ducking
beneath another koloss's attack, and spun, felling three different
koloss in one sweep by cutting at their knees.
As she completed
her spin, she rammed her sword into the earth point-first. As
expected, the large, thirteen-foot-tall beast attacked a second
later, swinging a sword that was so large that it made the air roar.
Vin planted her sword just in time, for—even with pewter—she
never would have been able to parry this enormous creature's weapon.
That weapon, however, slammed into the blade of her sword, which was
stabilized by the earth below. The metal quivered beneath her hands,
but she held against the blow.
Fingers still
stinging from the shock of such a powerful block, Vin let go of the
sword and jumped. She didn't Push—she didn't need to—but
landed on the cross guard of her sword and leaped off it. The koloss
showed that same, characteristic surprise as it saw her leap thirteen
feet into the air, leg drawn back, tasseled mist-cloak flapping.
She kicked the
koloss directly in the side of the head. The skull cracked. Koloss
were inhumanly tough, but her flared pewter was enough. The
creature's beady eyes rolled back in its head, and it collapsed. Vin
Pushed slightly on the sword, keeping herself up long enough so that
when she fell, she landed directly on the felled koloss's chest.
The koloss around
her froze. Even in the midst of the blood fury, they were shocked to
see her drop such an enormous beast with only a kick. Perhaps their
minds were too slow to process what they had just seen. Or, perhaps
in addition to fear, they really could feel a measure of wariness.
Vin didn't know enough about them to tell. She did understand that in
a regular koloss army, what she'd just done would have earned her the
obedience of every creature that had watched her.
Unfortunately, this
army was being controlled by an external force. Vin stood up
straight, could see Elend's small, desperate army in the distance.
Under Elend's guidance, they held. The fighting humans would have an
effect on the koloss similar to Vin's mysterious strength—the
creatures wouldn't understand how such a small force could hold
against them. They wouldn't see the attrition, or the dire situation
of Elend's group; they would simply see a smaller, inferior army
standing and fighting.
Vin turned to
resume combat. The koloss approached her with more trepidation, but
they still came. That was the oddity about koloss. They never
retreated. They felt fear, they just couldn't act on it. It did,
however, weaken them. She could see it in the way they approached
her, the way they looked. They were close to breaking.
And so, she burned
brass and Pushed on the emotions of one of the smaller creatures. At
first, it resisted. She shoved harder. And, finally, something broke
within the creature and he became hers. The one who had been
controlling him was too far away, and was focused on too many koloss
at once. This creature—its mind confused because of the frenzy,
emotions in a turmoil because of its shock, fear, and
frustration—came completely under Vin's mental control.
Immediately, she
ordered the creature to attack his companions. He was cut down a
moment later, but not before he killed two other koloss. As Vin
fought, she snatched up another koloss, then another. She struck
randomly, fighting with her sword to keep the koloss distracted as
she plucked members from their group and turned them. Soon, the area
around her was in chaos, and she had a small line of koloss fighting
for her. Every time one fell, she replaced it with two more.
As she fought, she
spared a glanced for Elend's group again, and was relieved to find a
large segment of koloss fighting alongside the group of humans. Elend
himself moved among them, no longer fighting, focused on snatching
koloss after koloss to his side. It had been a gamble for Elend to
come to this city on his own, one she wasn't sure she approved of.
For the moment, she was just glad she'd managed to catch up in time.
Taking Elend's cue,
she stopped fighting, and instead concentrated on commanding her
small force of koloss, snatching up new members one at a time. Soon,
she had a group of almost a hundred fighting for her.
Won't be long
now , she thought. And, sure enough, she soon caught sight of a
speck in the air, shooting toward her through the falling ash. The
speck resolved into a figure in dark robes, bounding over the army by
Pushing down on koloss swords. The tall figure was bald, its face
tattooed. In the ash-darkened light of midday, Vin could make out the
two thick spikes that had been driven point-first through its eyes. A
Steel Inquisitor, one she didn't recognize.
The Inquisitor hit
hard, cutting down one of Vin's stolen koloss with a pair of obsidian
axes. It focused its sightless gaze on Vin, and despite herself she
felt a stirring of panic. A succession of distinct memories flashed
in her mind. A dark night, rainy and shadowed. Spires and towers. A
pain in her side. A long night spent captive in the Lord Ruler's
palace.
Kelsier, the
Survivor of Hathsin, dying on the streets of Luthadel.
Vin burned
electrum. This created a cloud of images around her, shadows of
possible things she could do in the future. Electrum, the Allomantic
complement of gold. Elend had started calling it "poor man's
atium." It wouldn't affect the battle much, other than to make
her immune to atium, should the Inquisitor have any.
Vin gritted her
teeth, dashing forward as the koloss army overwhelmed her few
remaining stolen creatures. She jumped, Pushing slightly on a fallen
sword and letting her momentum carry her toward the Inquisitor. The
specter lifted its axes, swinging, but at the last moment Vin Pulled
herself to the side. Her Pull wrenched a sword from the hands of a
surprised koloss, and she caught this while spinning in the air, then
Pushed it at the Inquisitor.
He Pushed the
massive wedge of a weapon aside with barely a glance. Kelsier had
managed to defeat an Inquisitor, but only after a great deal of
effort. He himself had died moments later, struck dead by the Lord
Ruler.
No more
memories! Vin told herself forcefully. Focus on the moment .
Ash whipped past
her as she spun in the air, still flying from her Push against the
sword. She landed, foot slipping in koloss blood, then dashed at the
Inquisitor. She'd deliberately lured him out, killing and controlling
his koloss, forcing him to reveal himself. Now she had to deal with
him.
She whipped out a
glass dagger—the Inquisitor would be able to Push away a koloss
sword—and flared her pewter. Speed, strength, and poise flooded
her body. Unfortunately, the Inquisitor would have pewter as well,
making them equal.
Except for one
thing. The Inquisitor had a weakness. Vin ducked an axe swipe,
Pulling on a koloss sword to give herself the speed to get out of the
way. Then, she Pushed on the same weapon, throwing herself forward as
she jabbed for the Inquisitor's neck. He fended her off with a swipe
of the hand, blocking her dagger arm. But, with her other hand, she
grabbed the side of his robe.
Then she flared
iron and Pulled behind her, yanking on a dozen different
koloss swords at once. The sudden Pull propelled her backward.
Steelpushes and Ironpulls were jolting, blunt things that had far
more power than subtlety. With pewter flared, Vin hung on to the
robe, and the Inquisitor obviously stabilized himself by Pulling on
koloss weapons in front of him.
The robe gave,
ripping down the side, leaving Vin holding a wide section of cloth.
The Inquisitor's back lay exposed, and she should have been able to
see a single spike—similar to those in the eyes—protruding
from the creature's back. However, that spike was hidden by a metal
shield that covered the Inquisitor's back and ran underneath his arms
and around his front. Like a formfitting breastplate, it covered his
back, something like a sleek turtle's shell.
The Inquisitor
turned, smiling, and Vin cursed. That dorsal spike—driven
directly between every Inquisitor's shoulder blades—was their
weakest point. Pulling it free would kill the creature. That,
obviously, was the reason for the plate—something Vin suspected
the Lord Ruler would have forbidden. He had wanted his
servants to have weaknesses, so that he could control them.
Vin didn't have
much time for thought, for the koloss were still attacking. Even as
she landed, tossing aside the ripped fabric, a large, blue-skinned
monster swung at her. Vin jumped, cresting the sword as it swung
beneath her, then Pushed against it to give herself some height.
The Inquisitor
followed, now on the attack. Ash spun in the air currents around Vin
as she bounded across the battlefield, trying to think. The only
other way she knew to kill an Inquisitor was to behead it—an
act more easily contemplated than completed, considering that the
fiend would be toughened by pewter.
She let herself
land on a deserted hill on the outskirts of the battlefield. The
Inquisitor thumped to the ashen earth behind her. Vin dodged an axe
blade, trying to get in close enough to slash. But the Inquisitor
swung with his other blade, and Vin took a gash in the arm as she
turned the weapon aside with her dagger.
Warm blood dribbled
down her wrist. Blood the color of the red sun. She growled, facing
down her inhuman opponent. Inquisitor smiles disturbed her. She threw
herself forward, to strike again.
Something flashed
in the air.
Blue lines, moving
quickly—the Allomantic indication of nearby bits of metal. Vin
barely had time to twist herself out of her attack as a handful of
coins surprised the Inquisitor from behind, cutting into his body in
a dozen different places.
The creature
screamed, spinning, throwing out drops of blood as Elend hit the
ground atop the hill. His brilliant white uniform was soiled with ash
and blood, but his face was clean, his eyes bright. He carried a
dueling cane in one hand, the other rested against the earth,
steadying him from his Steeljump. His physical Allomancy still lacked
polish.
Yet, he was
Mistborn, like Vin. And now the Inquisitor was wounded. Koloss were
crowding around the hill, clawing their way toward the top, but Vin
and Elend still had a few moments. She dashed forward, raising her
knife, and Elend attacked as well. The Inquisitor tried to watch both
of them at once, its smile finally fading. It moved to jump away.
Elend flipped a
coin into the air. A single, sparkling bit of copper spun through the
flakes of ash. The Inquisitor saw this, and smiled again, obviously
anticipating Elend's Push. It assumed that its weight would transfer
through the coin, then hit Elend's weight, since Elend would be
Pushing as well. Two Allomancers of near-similar weight, shoving
against each other. They would both be thrown back—the
Inquisitor to attack Vin, Elend into a pile of koloss.
Except, the
Inquisitor didn't anticipate Elend's Allomantic strength. How could
it? Elend did stumble, but the Inquisitor was thrown away with a
sudden, violent Push.
He's so
powerful! Vin thought, watching the surprised Inquisitor fall.
Elend was no ordinary Allomancer—he might not have learned
perfect control yet, but when he flared his metals and Pushed, he
could really Push .
Vin dashed forward
to attack as the Inquisitor tried to reorient himself. He managed to
catch her arm as her knife fell, his powerful grip throwing a shock
of pain up her already wounded arm. She cried out as he threw her to
the side.
Vin hit the ground
and rolled, throwing herself back up to her feet. The world spun, and
she could see Elend swinging his dueling cane at the Inquisitor. The
creature blocked the swing with an arm, shattering the wood, then
ducked forward and rammed an elbow into Elend's chest. The emperor
grunted.
Vin Pushed against
the koloss who were now only a few feet away, shooting herself toward
the Inquisitor again. She'd dropped her knife—but, then, he'd
also lost his axes. She could see him glancing to the side, toward
where the weapons had fallen, but she didn't give him a chance to go
for them. She tackled him, trying to throw him back to the ground.
Unfortunately, he was much larger—and much stronger—than
she was. He tossed her down in front of him, knocking the breath from
her.
The koloss were
upon them. But Elend had grabbed one of the fallen axes, and he
struck for the Inquisitor.
The Inquisitor
moved with a sudden jolt of speed. Its form became a blur, and Elend
swung only at empty air. Elend spun, shock showing on his face as the
Inquisitor came up, wielding not an axe, but—oddly—a
metal spike, like the ones in his own body but sleeker and longer.
The creature raised the spike, moving inhumanly fast—faster
even than any Allomancer should have managed.
That was no
pewter run , Vin thought. That wasn't even duralumin .
She scrambled to her feet, watching the Inquisitor. The creature's
strange speed faded, but it was still in a position to hit Elend
directly in the back with the spike. Vin was too far away to help.
But the koloss
weren't. They were cresting the hill, mere feet from Elend and his
opponent. Desperate, Vin flared brass and grabbed the emotions of the
koloss closest to the Inquisitor. Even as the Inquisitor moved to
attack Elend, her koloss spun, swinging its wedge-like sword, hitting
the Inquisitor directly in the face.
It didn't separate
the head from the body. It just crushed the head completely.
Apparently, that was sufficient, for the Inquisitor dropped without a
sound, falling motionless.
A shock ran through
the koloss army.
"Elend!"
Vin said. "Now!"
The emperor turned
away from the dying Inquisitor, and she could see the look of
concentration on his face. Once, Vin had seen the Lord Ruler affect
an entire city square full of people with his emotional Allomancy. He
had been stronger than she was; far stronger—even—than
Kelsier.
She couldn't see
Elend burn duralumin, then brass, but she could feel it. Feel him
pressing on her emotions as he sent out a general wave of power,
Soothing thousands of koloss at once. They all stopped fighting. In
the distance, Vin could make out the haggard remnants of Elend's
peasant army, standing in an exhausted circle of bodies. Ash
continued to fall. It rarely stopped, these days.
The koloss lowered
their weapons. Elend had won.

This is
actually what happened to Rashek, I believe. He pushed too hard. He
tried to burn away the mists by moving the planet closer to the sun,
but he moved it too far, making the world far too hot for the people
who inhabited it .
The ashmounts
were his solution to this. He had learned that shoving a planet
around required too much precision, so instead he caused the
mountains to erupt, spewing ash and smoke into the air. The thicker
atmosphere made the world cooler, and turned the sun red .





4
SAZED,
CHIEF AMBASSADOR OF THE NEW EMPIRE , studied the sheet of
paper in front of him. The tenets of the Canzi people , it
read. On the beauty of mortality, the importance of death, and
the vital function of the human body as a partaker of the divine
whole .
The words were
written in his own hand, copied out of one of his Feruchemical
metalminds—where he had storages containing literally thousands
of books. Beneath the heading, filling most of the sheet in cramped
writing, he had listed the basic beliefs of the Canzi and their
religion.
Sazed settled back
in his chair, holding up the paper and going over his notes one more
time. He'd been focusing on this one religion for a good day now, and
he wanted to make a decision about it. Even before the day's study,
he'd known much about the Canzi faith, for he'd studied it—along
with all of the other pre-Ascension religions—for most of his
life. Those religions had been his passion, the focus of all of his
research.
And then the day
had come where he'd realized that all of his learning had been
meaningless.
The Canzi
religion contradicts itself , he decided, making a notation with
his pen at the side of the paper. It explains that all creatures
are part of the "divine whole" and implies that each body
is a work of art created by a spirit who decides to live in this
world .
However, one of
its other tenets is that the evil are punished with bodies that do
not function correctly . A distasteful doctrine, in Sazed's
mind. Those who were born with mental or physical deficiencies
deserved compassion, perhaps pity, but not disdain. Besides, which of
the religion's ideals were true? That spirits chose and designed
their bodies as they wished, or that they were punished by the body
chosen for them? And what of the influence of lineage upon a child's
features and temperament?
He nodded to
himself, made a note at the bottom of the sheet of paper. Logically
inconsistent. Obviously untrue.
"What is that
you have there?" Breeze asked.
Sazed looked up.
Breeze sat beside a small table, sipping his wine and eating grapes.
He wore one of his customary nobleman's suits, complete with a dark
jacket, a bright red vest, and a dueling cane—with which he
liked to gesture as he spoke. He'd gained back most of the weight
he'd lost during Luthadel's siege and its aftermath, and could
reasonably be described as "portly" once again.
Sazed looked down.
He carefully placed the sheet alongside some hundred others inside
his portfolio, then closed the cloth-wrapped board cover and did up
the ties. "It is nothing of consequence, Lord Breeze," he
said.
Breeze sipped
quietly at his wine. "Nothing of consequence? You seem to always
be puttering around with those sheets of yours. Whenever you have a
free moment, you pull one of them out."
Sazed set the
portfolio beside his chair. How to explain? Each of the sheets in the
thick portfolio outlined one of the over three hundred different
religions the Keepers had collected. Each and every one of those
religions was now effectively "dead," as the Lord Ruler had
stamped them out very early in his reign, some thousand years before.
One year ago, the
woman Sazed loved had died. Now, he wanted to know . . . no, he had
to know . . . if the religions of the world had answers for him. He
would find the truth, or he would eliminate each and every faith.
Breeze was still
looking at him.
"I would
rather not talk about it, Lord Breeze," Sazed said.
"As you wish,"
Breeze said, raising his cup. "Perhaps you could use your
Feruchemist's powers to listen in on the conversation happening in
the next room . . ."
"I do not
think it would be polite to do so."
Breeze smiled. "My
dear Terrisman—only you would come to conquer a city, then
worry about being 'polite' to the dictator you're threatening."
Sazed glanced down,
feeling slightly abashed. But, he could not deny Breeze's remarks.
Though the two of them had brought no army with them to Lekal City,
they had indeed come to conquer. They simply intended to do it with a
piece of paper rather than a sword.
It all hinged on
what was happening in the next room. Would the king sign the treaty
or not? All Breeze and Sazed could do was wait. He itched to get his
portfolio out, to look over the next religion in the stack. He'd been
considering the Canzi for over a day, and now that he'd made a
decision about it, he wished to move on to the next sheet. During the
last year, he'd gotten through about two-thirds of the religions.
Barely a hundred remained, though the number was closer to two
hundred if he took into account all of the sub-sects and
denominations.
He was close. Over
the next few months, he'd be able to get through the rest of the
religions. He wanted to give each one fair consideration. Surely, one
of the remaining ones would strike him as containing the essence of
truth he was searching for. Surely one of them would tell him what
had happened to Tindwyl's spirit without contradicting itself on a
half-dozen different points.
But, for the
moment, he felt self-conscious reading in front of Breeze. So, Sazed
forced himself to sit and wait patiently.
The room around him
was ornate, after the fashion of the old imperial nobility. Sazed
wasn't used to such finery, not anymore. Elend had sold or burned
most of his lavish trappings—his people had needed food and
warmth during the winter. King Lekal hadn't done the same, it
appeared, though perhaps that was because the winters were less harsh
here in the South.
Sazed glanced out
the window beside his chair. Lekal City didn't have a true palace—it
had been just a country estate until about two years ago. The manor
house, however, did have a nice view over the growing town—which
was more of a large shantytown than it was a true city.
Still, that
shantytown controlled lands that were dangerously inside Elend's
defensive perimeter. They needed the security of King Lekal's
allegiance. And so, Elend had sent a contingent—including
Sazed, who was his chief ambassador—to secure the loyalty of
the Lekal king. That man deliberated in the next room with his aides,
trying to decide whether or not to accept the treaty—which
would make them subjects of Elend Venture.
Chief
ambassador of the New Empire . . .
Sazed was not very
fond of his title, for it implied that he was actually a citizen of
the empire. His people, the Terris people, had sworn to call no man
master again. They had spent a thousand years being oppressed, being
bred like animals and turned into perfect, docile servants. Only with
the fall of the Final Empire had the Terris become free to rule
themselves.
So far, the Terris
people hadn't done a very good job of that. Of course, it didn't help
that the Steel Inquisitors had slaughtered the entire Terris ruling
council, leaving Sazed's people without direction or leadership.
In a way, we're
hypocrites anyway , he thought. The Lord Ruler was secretly
a Terrisman. One of our own did those horrible things to us. What
right do we have to insist on calling no foreigner master? It wasn't
a foreigner that destroyed our people, our culture, and our religion
.
And so, Sazed
served as Elend Venture's chief ambassador. Elend was a friend—a
man Sazed respected like few others. To Sazed's mind, even the
Survivor himself hadn't possessed Elend Venture's strength of
character. The emperor hadn't tried to assume authority over the
Terris people, even after he had accepted the refugees into his
lands. Sazed wasn't sure if his people were free or not, but they
owed Elend Venture a large debt. Sazed would gladly serve as the
man's ambassador.
Even if there were
other things Sazed felt he should be doing. Such as leading his
people.
No , Sazed
thought, glancing at his portfolio. No. A man with no faith
cannot lead them. I must find the truth for myself first. If such a
thing exists .
"It certainly
is taking them long enough," Breeze said, eating a grape. "One
would think that after all the talking we did to get to this point,
they'd know by now whether they intended to sign the thing or not."
Sazed glanced
toward the elaborately carved door on the other side of the room.
What would King Lekal decide? Did he really have a choice? "Did
we do the right thing here, do you think, Lord Breeze?" Sazed
found himself asking.
Breeze snorted.
"Right and wrong don't come into it. If we hadn't come
to bully King Lekal, someone else would have. It comes down to basic
strategic necessity. Or, that's how I see it—perhaps I'm just
more calculating than others."
Sazed eyed the
stocky man. Breeze was a Soother—in fact, he was the most
brazen, flagrant Soother Sazed had ever known. Most Soothers used
their powers with discrimination and subtlety, nudging emotions only
at the most opportune times. Breeze, however, played with everyone's
emotions. Sazed could feel the man's touch on his own feelings at
that moment, in fact—though only because he knew what to look
for.
"If you will
excuse the observation, Lord Breeze," Sazed said, "you do
not fool me as easily as you believe you do."
Breeze raised an
eyebrow.
"I know you
are a good man," Sazed said. "You work very hard to hide
it. You make a great show of being callous and selfish. Yet, to those
watching what you do and not just what you say, you become far more
transparent."
Breeze frowned, and
Sazed got a little stab of pleasure at surprising the Soother. He
obviously hadn't expected Sazed to be so blunt.
"My dear man,"
Breeze said, sipping his wine, "I'm disappointed in you. Weren't
you just speaking about being polite? Well, it's not at all
polite to point out a crusty old pessimist's dark inner secret."
"Dark inner
secret?" Sazed asked. "That you're kindhearted?"
"It's an
attribute in myself that I've worked very hard to discourage,"
Breeze said lightly. "Unfortunately, I prove too weak. Now, to
completely divert us from this subject—which I find far
too discomforting—I shall return to your earlier question. You
ask if we are doing the right thing? Right thing how? By forcing King
Lekal to become a vassal to Elend?"
Sazed nodded.
"Well then,"
Breeze said, "I'd have to say that yes, we did the right thing.
Our treaty will give Lekal the protection of Elend's armies."
"At the cost
of his own freedom to govern."
"Bah,"
Breeze said with a wave of his hand. "We both know that Elend is
a far better ruler than Lekal could ever hope to be. Most of his
people are living in half-finished shacks, for the Lord Ruler's
sake!"
"Yes, but you
must admit that we bullied him."
Breeze frowned.
"That's how all politics is. Sazed, this man's nephew sent an
army of koloss to destroy Luthadel! He's lucky Elend didn't just come
down and wipe out the entire city in retribution. We have bigger
armies, more resources, and better Allomancers. This people will be
far better off once Lekal signs that treaty. What is wrong with you,
my dear man? You argued all these same points not two days ago at the
negotiating table."
"I apologize,
Lord Breeze," Sazed said. "I . . . seem to find myself
feeling contrary of late."
Breeze didn't
respond at first. "It still hurts, does it?" he asked.
That man is far
too good at understanding the emotions of others , Sazed
thought. "Yes," he finally whispered.
"It will
stop," Breeze said. "Eventually."
Will it? Sazed
thought, looking away. It had been a year. It still felt . . . as if
nothing would ever be right again. Sometimes, he wondered if his
immersion in the religions was simply a way of hiding from his pain.
If that were so,
then he'd chosen a poor way to cope, for the pain was always there
waiting for him. He had failed. No, his faith had failed
him. Nothing was left to him.
It was all. Just.
Gone.
"Look,"
Breeze said, drawing his attention, "sitting here and waiting
for Lekal to make up his mind is obviously making us anxious. Why
don't we talk about something else? How about telling me about one of
those religions you have memorized. You haven't tried to convert me
in months!"
"I stopped
wearing my copperminds nearly a year ago, Breeze."
"But surely
you remember a bit," Breeze said. "Why don't you try to
convert me? You know, for old times' sake and all that."
"I don't think
so, Breeze."
It felt like a
betrayal. As a Keeper—a Terris Feruchemist—he could store
memories inside of pieces of copper, then withdraw them later. During
the time of the Final Empire, Sazed's kind had suffered much to
gather their vast stores of information—and not just about
religions. They had gathered every shred of information they could
find about the time before the Lord Ruler. They'd memorized it,
passed it on to others, depending on their Feruchemy to maintain
accuracy.
Yet they'd never
found the one thing they sought most urgently, the thing that had
begun their quest: the religion of the Terris people. It had been
erased by the Lord Ruler during the first century of his reign.
Still, so many had
died, worked, and bled so that Sazed could have the vast storages
he'd inherited. And he had taken them off. After retrieving his notes
about each religion, writing them down on the pages he now carried in
his portfolio, he'd removed each and every one of his metalminds and
stored them away.
They just . . .
didn't seem to matter anymore. At times, nothing did. He tried not to
dwell too much on that. But the thought lurked in his mind, terrible
and impossible to banish. He felt tainted, unworthy. As far as Sazed
knew, he was the last living Feruchemist. They didn't have the
resources to search right now, but in a year's time, no Keeper
refugees had made their way to Elend's domain. Sazed was it. And,
like all Terris stewards, he'd been castrated as a child. The
hereditary power of Feruchemy might very well die with him. There
would be some small trace of it left in the Terris people, but given
the Lord Ruler's efforts to breed it away and the deaths of the Synod
. . . things did not look good.
The metalminds
remained packed away, carried along wherever he went, but never used.
He doubted he would ever draw upon them again.
"Well?"
Breeze asked, rising and walking over to lean against the window
beside Sazed. "Aren't you going to tell me about a religion?
Which is it going to be? That religion where people made maps, maybe?
The one that worshipped plants? Surely you've got one in there that
worships wine. That might fit me."
"Please, Lord
Breeze," Sazed said, looking out over the city. Ash was falling.
It always did these days. "I do not wish to speak of these
things."
"What?"
Breeze asked. "How can that be?"
"If there were
a God, Breeze," Sazed said, "do you think he'd have let so
many people be killed by the Lord Ruler? Do you think he'd have let
the world become what it is now? I will not teach you—or
anyone—a religion that cannot answer my questions. Never
again."
Breeze fell silent.
Sazed reached down,
touching his stomach. Breeze's comments pained him. They brought his
mind back to that terrible time a year before, when Tindwyl had been
killed. When Sazed had fought Marsh at the Well of Ascension, and had
nearly been killed himself. Even through his clothing, he could feel
the scars on his abdomen, where Marsh had hit him with a collection
of metal rings, piercing Sazed's skin and nearly killing him.
He'd drawn upon the
Feruchemical power of those very rings to save his life, healing his
body, engulfing them within him. Soon after, however, he'd stored up
some health and then had a surgeon remove the rings from his body.
Despite Vin's protests that having them inside him would be an
advantage, Sazed was worried that it was unhealthy to keep them
embedded in his own flesh. Besides, he had just wanted them gone.
Breeze turned to
look out the window. "You were always the best of us, Sazed,"
he said quietly. "Because you believed in something."
"I am sorry,
Lord Breeze," Sazed said. "I do not mean to disappoint
you."
"Oh, you don't
disappoint me," Breeze said. "Because I don't believe what
you've said. You're not meant to be an atheist, Sazed. I have a
feeling you'll be no good at it—doesn't suit you at all. You'll
come around eventually."
Sazed looked back
out the window. He was brash for a Terrisman, but he did not wish to
argue further.
"I never did
thank you," Breeze said.
"For what,
Lord Breeze?"
"For pulling
me out of myself," Breeze said. "For forcing me to get up,
a year ago, and keep going. If you hadn't helped me, I don't know
that I would ever have gotten over . . . what happened."
Sazed nodded. On
the inside, however, his thoughts were more bitter. Yes, you saw
destruction and death, my friend. But the woman you love is
still alive. I could have come back too, if I hadn't lost her. I
could have recovered, as you did.
The door opened.
Sazed and Breeze
both turned. A solitary aide entered, bearing an ornate sheet of
parchment. King Lekal had signed the treaty at the bottom. His
signature was small, almost cramped, in the large space allotted. He
knew he was beaten.
The aide set the
treaty on the table, then retreated.

Each time
Rashek tried to fix things, he made them worse. He had to change the
world's plants to make them able to survive in the new, harsh
environment. Yet, that change left the plants less nutritious to
mankind. Indeed, the falling ash would make men sick, causing them to
cough like those who spent too long mining beneath the earth. And so
Rashek changed mankind itself as well, altering them so that they
could survive .





5
ELEND KNELT
BESIDE THE FALLEN INQUISITOR , trying to ignore the mess
that was left of the thing's head. Vin approached, and he noted the
wound on her forearm. As usual, she all but ignored the injury.
The koloss army
stood quietly on the battlefield around them. Elend still wasn't
comfortable with the idea of controlling the creatures. He felt . . .
tainted by even associating with them. Yet, it was the only way.
"Something's
wrong, Elend," Vin said.
He looked up from
the body. "What? You think there might be another one around?"
She shook her head.
"Not that. That Inquisitor moved too quickly at the end. I've
never seen a person—Allomancer or not—with that kind of
speed."
"He must have
had duralumin," Elend said, looking down. For a time, he and Vin
had held an edge, since they'd had access to an Allomantic metal the
Inquisitors hadn't known about. Reports now indicated that edge was
gone.
Fortunately, they
still had electrum. The Lord Ruler was to be thanked for that,
actually. Poor man's atium. Normally, an Allomancer who was burning
atium was virtually invincible—only another Allomancer burning
the metal could fight him. Unless, of course, one had electrum.
Electrum didn't grant the same invincibility as atium—which
allowed an Allomancer to see slightly into the future—but it
did make one immune to atium.
"Elend,"
Vin said, kneeling, "it wasn't duralumin. The Inquisitor was
moving too quickly even for that."
Elend frowned. He
had seen the Inquisitor move only out of the corner of his eye, but
surely it hadn't been that fast. Vin had a tendency to be
paranoid and assume the worst.
Of course, she also
had a habit of being right.
She reached out and
grabbed the front of the corpse's robe, ripping it free. Elend turned
away. "Vin! Have respect for the dead!"
"I have no
respect for these things," she said, "nor will I ever. Did
you see how that thing tried to use one of its spikes to kill you?"
"That was
odd. Perhaps he felt he couldn't get to the axes in time."
"Here, look."
Elend glanced back.
The Inquisitor had the standard spikes—three pounded between
the ribs on each side of the chest. But . . . there was another
one—one Elend hadn't seen in any other Inquisitor
corpse—pounded directly through the front of this creature's
chest.
Lord Ruler!
Elend thought. That one would have gone right through its
heart. How did it survive? Of course, if two spikes through the
brain didn't kill it, then one through the heart probably wouldn't
either.
Vin reached down
and yanked the spike free. Elend winced. She held it up, frowning.
"Pewter," she said.
"Really?"
Elend asked.
She nodded. "That
makes ten spikes. Two through the eyes and one through the shoulders:
all steel. Six through the ribs: two steel, four bronze. Now this, a
pewter one—not to mention the one he tried to use on you, which
appears to be steel."
Elend studied the
spike in her hand. In Allomancy and Feruchemy, different metals did
different things—he could only guess that for Inquisitors, the
type of metal used in the various spikes was important as well.
"Perhaps they don't use Allomancy at all, but some . . . third
power."
"Maybe,"
Vin said, gripping the spike, standing up. "We'll need to cut
open the stomach and see if it had atium."
"Maybe this
one will finally have some." They always burned electrum as a
precaution; so far, none of the Inquisitors they'd met had actually
possessed any atium.
Vin shook her head,
staring out over the ash-covered battlefield. "We're missing
something, Elend. We're like children, playing a game we've watched
our parents play, but not really knowing any of the rules. And . . .
our opponent created the game in the first place."
Elend stepped
around the corpse, moving over to her. "Vin, we don't even known
that it's out there. The thing we saw a year ago at the Well . . .
perhaps it's gone. Perhaps it left, now that it's free. That could be
all it wanted."
Vin looked at him.
He could read in her eyes that she didn't believe that. Perhaps she
saw that he didn't really believe it either.
"It's out
there, Elend," she whispered. "It's directing the
Inquisitors; it knows what we're doing. That's why the koloss always
move against the same cities we do. It has power over the world—it
can change text that has been written, create miscommunications and
confusion. It knows our plans."
Elend put a hand on
her shoulder. "But today we beat it—and, it sent us this
handy koloss army."
"And how many
humans did we lose trying to capture this force?"
Elend didn't need
to speak the answer. Too many. Their numbers were dwindling.
The mists—the Deepness—were growing more powerful,
choking the life from random people, killing the crops of the rest.
The Outer Dominances were wastelands—only those closest to the
capital, Luthadel, still got enough daylight to grow food. And even
that area of livability was shrinking.
Hope, Elend
thought forcefully. She needs that from me; she's always needed
that from me . He tightened his grip on her shoulder, then
pulled her into an embrace. "We'll beat it, Vin. We'll find a
way."
She didn't
contradict him, but she obviously wasn't convinced. Still, she let
him hold her, closing her eyes and resting her head against his
chest. They stood on the battlefield before their fallen foe, but
even Elend had to admit that it didn't feel like much of a victory.
Not with the world collapsing around them.
Hope! he
thought again. I belong to the Church of the Survivor, now. It
has only one prime commandment .
Survive .
"Give me one
of the koloss," Vin finally said, pulling out of the embrace.
Elend released one
of the medium-large creatures, letting Vin take control of it. He
still didn't quite understand how they controlled the creatures. Once
he had control of a koloss, he could control it indefinitely—whether
sleeping or awake, burning metals or not. There were many things he
didn't understand about Allomancy. He'd had only a year to use his
powers, and he had been distracted by ruling an empire and trying to
feed his people, not to mention the wars. He'd had little time for
practice.
Of course, Vin
had less time than that to practice before she killed the Lord Ruler
himself . Vin, however, was a special case. She used Allomancy
as easily as other people breathed; it was less a skill to her than
an extension of who she was. Elend might be more powerful—as
she always insisted—but she was the true master.
Vin's lone koloss
wandered over and picked up the fallen Inquisitor and the spike.
Then, Elend and Vin walked down the hill—Vin's koloss servant
following—toward the human army. The koloss troops split and
made a passage at Elend's command. He suppressed a shiver even as he
controlled them.
Fatren, the dirty
man who ruled the city, had thought to set up a triage unit—though
Elend wasn't very confident in the abilities of a group of skaa
surgeons.
"Why'd they
stop?" Fatren asked, standing in front of his men as Vin and
Elend approached across the ash-stained ground
"I promised
you a second army, Lord Fatren," Elend said. "Well, here it
is."
"The koloss?"
he asked.
Elend nodded.
"But they're
the army that came to destroy us."
"And now
they're ours," Elend said. "Your men did very well. Make
certain they understand that this victory was theirs. We had to force
that Inquisitor out into the open, and the only way to do that was to
turn his army against itself. Koloss become afraid when they see
something small defeating something large. Your men fought bravely;
because of them, these koloss are ours."
Fatren scratched
his chin. "So," he said slowly, "they got afraid of
us, so they switched sides?"
"Something
like that," Elend said, looking over the soldiers. He mentally
commanded some koloss to step forward. "These creatures will
obey orders from the men in this group. Have them carry your wounded
back to the city. However, make certain not to let your men attack or
punish the koloss. They are our servants now, understand?"
Fatren nodded.
"Let's go,"
Vin said, eagerness sounding in her voice as she looked over at the
small city.
"Lord Fatren,
do you want to come with us, or do you want to supervise your men?"
Elend asked.
Fatren's eyes
narrowed. "What are you going to do?"
"There is
something in your city we need to claim."
Fatren paused.
"I'll come, then." He gave some orders to his men while Vin
waited impatiently. Elend gave her a smile, then finally Fatren
joined them, and the three walked back toward the Vetitan gate.
"Lord Fatren,"
Elend said as they walked, "you should address me as 'my lord'
from now on."
Fatren looked up
from his nervous study of the koloss standing around them.
"Do you
understand?" Elend said, meeting the man's eyes.
"Um . . . yes.
My lord."
Elend nodded, and
Fatren fell a little behind him and Vin, as if showing an unconscious
deference. He didn't seem rebellious—for now, he was probably
happy to be alive. Perhaps he would eventually resent Elend for
taking command of his city, but by then, there would be little he
could do. Fatren's people would be accustomed to the security of
being part of a larger empire, and the stories of Elend's mysterious
command of the koloss—and therefore salvation of the city—would
be too strong. Fatren would never rule again.
So easily I
command, Elend thought. Just two years ago, I made even more
mistakes than this man. At least he managed to keep his city's people
together in a time of crisis. I lost my throne, until Vin conquered
it back for me .
"I worry about
you," Vin asked. "Did you have to start the battle without
me?"
Elend glanced to
the side. There was no reproach in her voice. Just concern.
"I wasn't sure
when—or even if—you'd arrive," he said.
"The opportunity was just too good. The koloss had just marched
an entire day. We probably killed five hundred before they even
decided to start attacking."
"And the
Inquisitor?" Vin asked. "Did you really think you could
take him on your own?"
"Did you?"
Elend asked. "You fought him for a good five minutes before I
was able to get there and help."
Vin didn't use the
obvious argument—that she was by far the more accomplished
Mistborn. Instead, she just walked silently. She still worried about
him, even though she no longer tried to protect him from all danger.
Both her worry and her willingness to let him take risks were part of
her love for him. And he sincerely appreciated both.
The two of them
tried to stay together as much as possible, but that wasn't always
feasible—such as when Elend had discovered a koloss army
marching on an indefensible city while Vin was away delivering orders
to Penrod in Luthadel. Elend had hoped she would return to his army
camp in time to find out where he had gone, then come help, but he
hadn't been able to wait. Not with thousands of lives at stake.
Thousands of lives
. . . and more.
They eventually
reached the gates. A crowd of soldiers who had either arrived late to
the battle or been too afraid to charge stood atop the bulwark,
looking down with awe. Several thousand koloss had gotten past
Elend's men and tried to attack the city. These now stood
motionless—by his silent command—waiting outside the
bulwark.
The soldiers opened
the gates, letting in Vin, Elend, Fatren, and Vin's single koloss
servant. Most of them eyed Vin's koloss with distrust—as well
they should. She ordered it to put down the dead Inquisitor, then
made it follow as the three of them walked down the ash-piled city
street. Vin had a philosophy: the more people who saw koloss and grew
accustomed to the creatures, the better. It made the people less
frightened of the beasts, and made it easier to fight should they
have to face koloss in battle.
They soon
approached the Ministry building that Elend had first inspected upon
entering the city. Vin's koloss walked forward and began to rip the
boards off of its doors.
"The Ministry
building?" Fatren said. "What good is it? We already
searched it."
Elend eyed him.
"My lord,"
Fatren said belatedly.
"The Steel
Ministry was linked directly to the Lord Ruler," Elend said.
"Its obligators were his eyes across the empire, and through
them he controlled the nobility, watched over commerce, and made
certain that orthodoxy was maintained."
The koloss yanked
the door open. Moving inside, Elend burned tin, enhancing his
eyesight so that he could see in the dim light. Vin, obviously doing
the same, had little trouble picking her way across the broken boards
and furniture littering the floor. Apparently, Fatren's people hadn't
just "searched" the place—they'd ransacked it.
"Yeah, I know
about obligators," Fatren said. "There aren't any of them
here, my lord. They left with the nobility."
"The
obligators saw to some very important projects, Fatren," Elend
said. "Things like trying to discover how to use new Allomantic
metals, or like searching for lines of Terris blood that were
breeding true. One of their projects is of particular interest to
us."
"Here,"
Vin said, calling out from beside something set in the floor. A
hidden trapdoor.
Fatren glanced back
toward the sunlight, perhaps wishing that he'd decided to bring a few
soldiers with him. Beside the trapdoor, Vin lit a lantern she'd
salvaged from somewhere. In the blackness of a basement, even tin
wouldn't provide sight. Vin opened the trapdoor, and they made their
way down the ladder. It eventually ended in a wine cellar.
Elend walked to the
center of the small cellar, surveying it as Vin began to check the
walls. "I found it," she said a second later, rapping her
fist on a certain portion of the stone block wall. Elend walked
forward, joining her. Sure enough, there was a thin slit in the
stones, barely visible. Burning steel, Elend could see two faint blue
lines pointing to metal plates hidden behind the stone. Two stronger
lines pointed behind him, toward a large metal plate set into the
wall, affixed very securely with enormous bolts bored into the stone.
"Ready?"
Vin asked.
Elend nodded,
flaring his iron. They both Pulled on the plate buried in the stone
wall, steadying themselves by Pulling back against the plates on the
back wall.
Not for the first
time, the foresight of the Ministry impressed Elend. How could they
have known that someday, a group of skaa would take control of this
city? And yet, this door had not only been hidden—it had been
crafted so that only someone with Allomancy could open it. Elend
continued to Pull in both directions at once, feeling as if his body
were being stretched between two horses. But, fortunately, he had the
power of pewter to strengthen his body and keep it from ripping
apart. Vin grunted in effort beside him, and soon a section of the
wall began to slide open toward them. No amount of prying would have
been able to wedge the thick stone open, and only a lengthy, arduous
effort would have been enough to break through. Yet, with Allomancy,
they opened the door in a matter of moments.
Finally, they let
go. Vin exhaled in exhaustion, and Elend could tell that it had been
more difficult for her than it was for him. Sometimes, he didn't feel
justified in having more power than she—after all, he'd been an
Allomancer for far less time.
Vin picked up her
lantern, and they moved into the now-open room. Like the other two
Elend had seen, this cavern was enormous. It extended into the
distance, their lantern's light making only a faint dent in the
blackness. Fatren gasped in wonder as he joined them in the doorway.
The room was filled with shelves. Hundreds of them. Thousands of
them.
"What is it?"
Fatren asked.
"Food,"
Elend said. "And basic supplies. Medicines, cloth, water."
"So much,"
Fatren said. "Here, all along . . ."
"Go get more
men," Elend said. "Soldiers. We'll need them to guard the
entrance, to keep people from breaking in and stealing the contents."
Fatren's face
hardened. "This place belongs to my people."
"My
people, Fatren," Elend said, watching Vin walk into the room,
bearing the light with her. "This city is mine, now, as are its
contents."
"You came to
rob us," Fatren accused. "Just like the bandits who tried
to take the city last year."
"No,"
Elend said, turning toward the soot-stained man. "I came to
conquer you. There's a difference."
"I don't see
one."
Elend gritted his
teeth to keep himself from snapping at the man—the fatigue, the
draining effect of leading an empire that seemed doomed—put him
on edge so often lately. No, he told himself. Men like
Fatren need more than another tyrant. They need someone to look up
to.
Elend approached
the man, and intentionally didn't use emotional Allomancy on him.
Soothing was effective in many situations, but it wore off quickly.
It was not a method to make permanent allies.
"Lord Fatren,"
Elend said. "I want you to think carefully about what you're
arguing for. What would happen if I did leave you? With this
much food, this much wealth down here? Can you trust your people not
to break in, your soldiers not to try selling some of this to other
cities? What happens when the secret of your food supply gets out?
Will you welcome the thousands of refugees who will come? Will you
protect them, and this cavern, against the raiders and bandits who
will follow?"
Fatren fell silent.
Elend laid a hand
on the man's shoulder. "I meant what I said above, Lord Fatren.
Your people fought well—I was very impressed. They owe their
survival today to you—your foresight, your training. Mere hours
ago, they assumed they would be slaughtered by koloss. Now, they are
not only safe, but under the protection of a much larger army.
"Don't fight
this. You've struggled well, but it is time to have allies. I won't
lie to you—I'm going to take the contents of this cavern,
whether you resist me or not. However, I intend to give you the
protection of my armies, the stability of my food supplies, and my
word of honor that you can continue to rule your people under me. We
need to work together, Lord Fatren. That's the only way any of us are
going to survive the next few years."
Fatren looked up.
"You're right, of course," he said. "I'll go get those
men you asked for, my lord."
"Thank you,"
Elend said. "And, if you have anyone who can write, send them to
me. We'll need to catalogue what we have down here."
Fatren nodded, then
left.
"Once, you
couldn't do things like that," Vin said from a short distance
away, her voice echoing in the large cavern.
"Like what?"
"Give a man
such forceful commands," she said. "Take control away from
him. You'd have wanted to give these people a vote on whether or not
they should join your empire."
Elend looked back
at the doorway. He stood silently for a moment. He hadn't used
emotional Allomancy, and yet he felt as if he'd bullied Fatren
anyway. "Sometimes, I feel like a failure, Vin. There should be
another way."
"Not right
now, there isn't," Vin said, walking up to him, putting a hand
on his arm. "They need you, Elend. You know that they do."
He nodded. "I
know it. I just can't help thinking that a better man would have
found a way to make the will of the people work along with his rule."
"You did,"
she said. "Your parliamentary assembly still rules in Luthadel,
and the kingdoms you reign over maintain basic rights and privileges
for the skaa."
"Compromises,"
Elend said. "They only get to do what they want as long as I
don't disagree with them."
"It's enough.
You have to be realistic, Elend."
"When my
friends and I met together, I was the one who spoke of the perfect
dreams, of the great things we'd accomplish. I was always the
idealist."
"Emperors
don't have that luxury," Vin said quietly.
Elend looked at
her, then sighed, turning away.
Vin stood, watching
Elend in the cold lantern-light of the cavern. She hated seeing such
regret, such . . . disillusionment in him. In a way, his current
problems seemed even worse than the self-doubt he had once struggled
with. He seemed to see himself as a failure despite what he had
accomplished.
And yet, he didn't
let himself wallow in that failure. He moved on, working despite his
regret. He was a harder man than he had once been. That wasn't
necessarily a bad thing. The old Elend had been a man who was easily
dismissed by many—a genius who had wonderful ideas, but little
ability to lead. Still, she missed some of what was gone. The simple
idealism. Elend was still an optimist, and he was still a scholar,
but both attributes seemed tempered by what he had been forced to
endure.
She watched him
move along one of the storage shelves, trailing a finger in the dust.
He brought the finger up, looking at it for a moment, then snapped
it, throwing a small burst of dust into the air. The beard made him
look more rugged—like the wartime commander he had become. A
year of solid training with Allomancy and the sword had strengthened
his body, and he'd needed to get his uniforms retailored to fit
properly. The one he wore now was still stained from battle.
"This place is
amazing, isn't it?" Elend asked.
Vin turned,
glancing into the darkness of the storage cavern. "I suppose."
"He knew,
Vin," Elend said. "The Lord Ruler. He suspected that this
day would come—a day when the mists returned and food would be
scarce. So, he prepared these supply depots."
Vin joined Elend
beside a shelf. She knew from previous caverns that the food would
still be good, much of it processed in one of the Lord Ruler's
canneries, and would remain so for years in storage. The amount in
this cavern could feed the town above for years. Unfortunately, Vin
and Elend had more to worry about than a single town.
"Imagine the
effort this must have taken," Elend said, turning over a can of
stewed beef in his hand. "He would have had to rotate this food
every few years, constantly packing and storing new supplies. And he
did it for centuries, without anyone knowing what he was doing."
Vin shrugged. "It's
not so hard to keep secrets when you're a god-emperor with a
fanatical priesthood."
"Yes, but the
effort . . . the sheer scope of it all . . ." Elend paused,
looking at Vin. "You know what this means?"
"What?"
"The Lord
Ruler thought it could be beaten. The Deepness, the thing that we
released. The Lord Ruler thought he could eventually win."
Vin snorted. "It
doesn't have to mean that, Elend."
"Then why go
through all of this? He must have thought that fighting wasn't
hopeless."
"People
struggle, Elend. Even a dying beast will still keep fighting, will do
anything to stay alive."
"You have to
admit that these caverns are a good sign, though," Elend said.
"A good sign?"
Vin asked quietly, stepping closer. "Elend, I know you're just
trying to find hope in all this, but I have trouble seeing 'good
signs' anywhere lately. You have to admit now that the sun is getting
darker. Redder. It's even worse down here, in the South."
"Actually,"
Elend said, "I doubt that the sun has changed at all. It must be
all the smoke and ash in the air."
"Which is
another problem," Vin said. "The ash falls almost
perpetually now. People are having trouble keeping it out of their
streets. It blots out the light, making everything darker. Even if
the mists don't kill off next year's crops, the ash will.
Two winters ago—when we fought the koloss at Luthadel—was
the first I'd seen snow in the Central Dominance, and this last
winter was even worse. These aren't things we can fight, Elend, no
matter how big our army!"
"What do you
expect me to do, Vin?" Elend asked, slamming his can of stew
down on the shelf. "The koloss are gathering in the Outer
Dominances. If we don't build our defenses, our people won't last
long enough to starve."
Vin shook her head.
"Armies are short-term. This," she said, sweeping her hand
across the cavern. "This is short-term. What are we
doing here?"
"We're
surviving. Kelsier said—"
"Kelsier is
dead, Elend!" Vin snapped. "Am I the only one who
sees the irony in that? We call him the Survivor, but he is the one
who didn't survive! He let himself become a martyr. He
committed suicide. How is that surviving?"
She stood for a
moment, looking at Elend, breathing deeply. He stared back,
apparently undaunted by her outburst.
What am I
doing? Vin thought. I was just thinking about how much I
admired Elend's hope. Why argue with him now?
They were stretched
so thin. Both of them.
"I don't have
answers for you, Vin," Elend said in the dark cavern. "I
can't even begin to understand how to fight something like the mist.
Armies, however, I can deal with. Or, at least, I'm learning how."
"I'm sorry,"
Vin said, turning away. "I didn't mean to argue again. It's just
so frustrating."
"We're making
progress," Elend said. "We'll find a way, Vin. We'll
survive."
"Do you really
think we can do it?" Vin asked, turning to look him in the eyes.
"Yes,"
Elend said.
And she believed
him. He had hope, and always would. That was a big part of why she
loved him so much.
"Come on,"
Elend said, laying a hand on her shoulder. "Let's find what we
came for."
Vin joined him,
leaving her koloss behind, walking into the depths of the cavern as
they heard footsteps outside. There was more than one reason they had
come to this place. The food and the supplies—of which they
passed seemingly endless shelves—were important. However, there
was more.
A large metal plate
was set into the back wall of the rough-hewn cavern. Vin read the
words inscribed on it out loud.
" 'This is the
last metal I will tell you about,' " she read. " 'I have
trouble deciding the purpose of it. It allows you to see the past, in
a way. What a person could have been, and who they might have become,
had they made different choices. Much like gold, but for others.
" 'By now, the
mists have likely come again. Such a foul, hateful thing. Scorn it.
Don't go out in it. It seeks to destroy us all. If there is trouble,
know that you can control the koloss and the kandra by use of several
people Pushing on their emotions at once. I built this weakness into
them. Keep the secret wisely.' "
Beneath that was
listed an Allomantic compound of metals, one with which Vin was
already familiar. It was the alloy of atium they called
malatium—Kelsier's Eleventh Metal. So the Lord Ruler had
known about it. He'd simply been as baffled as the rest of them as to
its purpose.
The plate had been
written by the Lord Ruler, of course. Or, at least, he'd ordered it
written as it was. Each previous cache had also contained
information, written in steel. In Urteau, for instance, she had
learned about electrum. In the one to the east, they'd found a
description of aluminum—though they'd already known about that
metal.
"Not much new
there," Elend said, sounding disappointed. "We already knew
about malatium and about controlling koloss. Though, I'd never
thought to have several Soothers Push at the same time. That might be
helpful." Before, they'd thought it took a Mistborn burning
duralumin to get control of koloss.
"It doesn't
matter," Vin said, pointing at the other side of the plate. "We
have that."
The other half of
the plate contained a map, carved into steel, just like the maps they
had found in the other three storage caverns. It depicted the Final
Empire, divided into dominances. Luthadel was a square at the center.
An "X" to the east marked the main thing they'd come
looking for: the location of the final cavern.
There were five,
they thought. They'd found the first one beneath Luthadel, near the
Well of Ascension. It had given the location of the second, to the
east. The third had been in Urteau—Vin had been able to sneak
into that one, but they hadn't managed to recover the food yet. That
one had led them here, to the south.
Each map had two
numbers on it—a five and a lower number. Luthadel had been
number one. This one was number four.
"That's it,"
Vin said, running her fingers along the carved inscriptions on the
plate. "In the Western Dominance, as you guessed. Somewhere near
Chardees?"
"Fadrex City,"
Elend said.
"Cett's home?"
Elend nodded. He
knew far more about geography than she.
"That's the
place, then," Vin said. "The one where it is."
Elend met her eyes,
and she knew he understood her. The caches had grown progressively
larger and more valuable. Each one had a specialized aspect to it as
well—the first had contained weapons in addition to its other
supplies, while the second had contained large amounts of lumber. As
they'd investigated each successive cache, they'd grown more and more
excited about what the last one might contain. Something spectacular,
surely. Perhaps even it.
The Lord Ruler's
atium cache.
It was the most
valuable treasure in the Final Empire. Despite years of searching,
nobody had ever located it. Some said it didn't even exist. But, Vin
felt that it had to. Despite a thousand years of controlling the sole
mine that produced the extremely rare metal, he had allowed only a
small portion of atium to enter the economy. Nobody knew what the
Lord Ruler had done with the greater portion he had kept to himself
for all those centuries.
"Now, don't
get too excited," Elend said. "We have no proof that we'll
find the atium in that final cavern."
"It has to be
there," Vin said. "It makes sense. Where else would the
Lord Ruler store his atium?"
"If I could
answer that, we'd have found it."
Vin shook her head.
"He put it somewhere safe, but somewhere where it would
eventually be found. He left these maps as clues to his followers,
should he—somehow—be defeated. He didn't want an enemy
who captured one of the caverns to be able to find them all
instantly."
A trail of clues
that led to one, final cache. The most important one. It made sense.
It had to. Elend didn't look convinced. He rubbed his
bearded chin, studying the reflective plate in their lantern light.
"Even if we find it," he said, "I don't know that it
will help that much. What good is money to us now?"
"It's more
than money," she said. "It's power. A weapon we can use to
fight."
"Fight the
mists?" he asked.
Vin fell silent.
"Perhaps not," she finally said. "But the koloss, and
the other armies. With that atium, your empire becomes secure. . . .
Plus, atium is part of all this, Elend. It's only valuable because of
Allomancy—but Allomancy didn't exist until the Ascension."
"Another
unanswered question," Elend said. "Why did that nugget of
metal I ingested make me Mistborn? Where did it come from? Why was it
placed at the Well of Ascension, and by whom? Why was there only one
left, and what happened to the others?"
"Maybe we'll
find the answer once we take Fadrex," Vin said.
Elend nodded. She
could tell he considered the information contained in the caches the
most important reason to track them down, followed closely by the
supplies. To him, the possibility of finding atium was relatively
unimportant. Vin couldn't explain why she felt he was so wrong in
this regard. The atium was important. She just knew it. Her
earlier despair lightened as she looked over the map. They had to go
to Fadrex. She knew it.
The answers would
be there.
"Taking Fadrex
won't be easy," Elend noted. "Cett's enemies have
entrenched themselves quite solidly there. I hear a former Ministry
obligator is in charge."
"The atium
will be worth it," Vin said.
"If it's
there," Elend said.
She gave him a flat
stare.
He held up a hand.
"I'm just trying to do what you told me, Vin—I'm trying to
be realistic. However, I agree that Fadrex will be worth the effort.
Even if the atium isn't there, we need the supplies in that store. We
need to know what the Lord Ruler left us."
Vin nodded. She
herself no longer had any atium. She'd burned up their last bit a
year and a half ago, and she'd never gotten used to how exposed she
felt without it. Electrum softened that fear somewhat, but not
completely.
Voices sounded from
the other end of the cavern, and Elend turned. "I should go
speak to them," he said. "We're going to have to organize
things in here quickly."
"Have you told
them yet that we're going to have to move them back to Luthadel?"
Elend shook his
head. "They won't like it," he said. "They're becoming
independent, as I always hoped they would."
"It has to be
done, Elend," Vin said. "This city is well outside our
defensive perimeter. Plus, they can't have more than a few hours of
mistless daylight left this far out. Their crops are already doomed."
Elend nodded, but
he continued to stare out into the darkness. "I come, I seize
control of their city, take their treasure, then force them to
abandon their homes. And from here we go to Fadrex to conquer
another."
"Elend—"
He held up a hand.
"I know, Vin. It must be done." He turned, leaving the
lantern and walking toward the doorway. As he did, his posture
straightened, and his face became more firm.
Vin turned back to
the plate, rereading the Lord Ruler's words. On a different plate,
much like this one, Sazed had found the words of Kwaan, the long-dead
Terrisman who had changed the world by claiming to have found the
Hero of Ages. Kwaan had left his words as a confession of his errors,
warning that some kind of force was working to change the histories
and religions of mankind. He'd worried that the force was suborning
the Terris religion in order to cause a "Hero" to come to
the North and release it.
That was exactly
what Vin had done. She'd called herself hero, and had released the
enemy—all the while thinking that she was sacrificing her own
needs for the good of the world.
She ran her fingers
across the large plate.
We have to do
more than just fight wars! she thought, angry at the Lord Ruler.
If you knew so much, why didn't you leave us more than this? A
few maps in scattered halls filled with supplies? A couple of
paragraphs, telling us about metals that are of barely any use? What
good is a cave full of food when we have an entire empire to feed!
Vin stopped. Her
fingers—made far more sensitive by the tin she was burning to
help her eyesight in the dark cavern—brushed against grooves in
the plate's surface. She knelt, leaning close, to find a short
inscription carved in the metal, at the bottom, the letters much
smaller than the ones up above.
Be careful what
you speak, it read. It can hear what you say. It can read
what you write. Only your thoughts are safe .
Vin shivered.
Only your
thoughts are safe .
What had the Lord
Ruler learned in his moments of transcendence? What things had he
kept in his mind forever, never writing them down for fear of
revealing his knowledge, always expecting that he would eventually be
the one who took the power when it came again? Had he, perhaps,
planned to use that power to destroy the thing that Vin had released?
You have doomed
yourselves . . . . The Lord Ruler's last words, spoken right
before Vin had thrust the spear through his heart. He'd known. Even
then—before the mists had started coming during the day, before
she'd begun hearing the strange thumpings that led her to the Well of
Ascension—even then, she'd worried.
Be careful what
you speak . . . only your thoughts are safe .
I have to
figure this out. I have to connect what we have, find the way to
defeat—or outwit—this thing that I've loosed .
And I can't
talk this over with anyone, or it will know what I'm planning .

Rashek soon
found a balance in the changes he made to the world—which was
fortunate, for his power burned away quite quickly. Though the power
he held seemed immense to him, it was truly only a tiny fraction of
something much greater .
Of course, he
did end up naming himself the "Sliver of Infinity" in his
religion. Perhaps he understood more than I give him credit for .
Either way, we
had him to thank for a world without flowers, where plants grew brown
rather than green, and where people could survive in an environment
where ash fell from the sky on a regular basis .





6
I'M TOO
WEAK, Marsh thought.
Lucidity came upon
him suddenly, as it often did when Ruin wasn't watching him closely.
It was like waking from a nightmare, fully aware of what had been
going on in the dream, yet confused as to the reasoning behind his
actions.
He continued to
walk through the koloss camp. Ruin still controlled him, as it always
did. Yet, when it didn't press hard enough against Marsh's mind—when
it didn't focus on him—sometimes, Marsh's own thoughts
returned.
I can't fight
it, he thought. Ruin couldn't read his thoughts, of that he was
fairly confident. And yet, Marsh couldn't fight or struggle in any
way. When he did, Ruin immediately asserted control once again. This
had been proven to Marsh a dozen times over. Sometimes he managed to
quiver a finger, perhaps halt a step, but that was the best he could
do.
It was depressing.
However, Marsh had always considered himself to be a practical man,
and he forced himself to acknowledge the truth. He was never going to
gain enough control over his body to kill himself.
Ash fell as he
walked through the camp. Did it ever stop these days? He almost
wished that Ruin wouldn't ever let go of his mind. When his mind was
his own, Marsh saw only pain and destruction. When Ruin controlled
him, however, the falling ash was a thing of beauty, the red sun a
marvelous triumph, the world a place of sweetness in its death.
Madness, Marsh
thought, approaching the center of camp. I need to go mad. Then I
won't have to deal with all of this .
Other Inquisitors
joined him at the center of the camp, walking with quiet swishes of
their robes. They didn't speak. They never spoke—Ruin
controlled them all, so why bother with conversation? Marsh's
brethren had the normal spikes in their heads, driven into the skull.
Yet, he could also see telltale signs of the new spikes, jutting from
their chests and backs. Marsh had placed many of them himself,
killing the Terrismen that had either been captured in the north or
tracked down across the land.
Marsh himself had a
new set of spikes, some driven between the ribs, others driven down
through the chest. They were a beautiful thing. He didn't understand
why, but they excited him. The spikes had come through death, and
that was pleasant enough—but there was more. He knew, somehow,
that the Inquisitors had been incomplete—the Lord Ruler had
withheld some abilities to make the Inquisitors more dependent upon
him. To make certain they couldn't threaten him. But now, what he'd
kept back had been provided.
What a
beautiful world, Marsh thought, looking up into the falling ash,
feeling the light, comforting flakes upon his skin.

I speak of us
as "we." The group. Those of us who were trying to discover
and defeat Ruin. Perhaps my thoughts are now tainted, but I like to
look back and see the sum of what we were doing as a single, united
assault, though we were all involved in different processes and
plans.
We were one.
That didn't stop the world from ending, but that's not necessarily a
bad thing.





7
THEY GAVE
HIM BONES.
TenSoon flowed
around them, dissolving muscles, then re-forming them into organs,
sinew, and skin. He built a body around the bones, using skills
gained over centuries spent eating and digesting humans. Corpses
only, of course—he had never killed a man. The Contract forbade
such things.
After a year in his
pit of a prison, he felt as if he had forgotten how to use a body.
What was it like to touch the world with rigid digits, rather than a
body that flowed against the confines of stone? What was it like to
taste and smell with only tongue and nostrils, rather than with every
bit of skin exposed to the air. What was it like to . . .
To see. He opened
his eyes and gasped, drawing first breath into remade, full-sized
lungs. The world was a thing of wonder and of . . . light. He had
forgotten that, during the months of near madness. He pushed himself
to his knees, looking down at his arms. Then, he reached up, feeling
his face with a tentative hand.
His body wasn't
that of any specific person—he would have needed a model to
produce such a replica. Instead, he had covered the bones with
muscles and skin as best he could. He was old enough that he knew how
to create a reasonable approximation of a human. The features
wouldn't be handsome; they might even be a little grotesque. That,
however, was more than good enough for the moment. He felt . . . real
again.
Still on hands and
knees, he looked up at his captor. The cavern was lit only by a
glowstone—a large, porous rock set atop a thick column base.
The bluish fungus that grew on the rock made enough of a glow to see
by—especially if one had specifically grown eyes that were good
at seeing in dim blue light.
TenSoon knew his
captor. He knew most kandra, at least up to the Sixth and Seventh
Generations. This kandra's name was VarSell. In the Homeland, VarSell
didn't wear the bones of an animal or human, but instead used a True
Body—a set of false bones, human-shaped, crafted by a kandra
artisan. VarSell's True Body was quartz, and he left his skin
translucent, allowing the stone to sparkle faintly in the fungal
light as he studied TenSoon.
I made my body
opaque, TenSoon realized. Like that of a human, with tan
skin to obscure the muscles beneath . Why had that come so
naturally to him? Once, he had cursed the years he spent among the
humans, using their bones instead of a True Body. Perhaps he had
fallen to that same old default because his captors hadn't given him
a True Body. Human bones. An insult, of sorts.
TenSoon stood.
"What?" he asked at the look in VarSell's eyes.
"I just picked
a random set of bones from the storeroom," VarSell said. "It's
ironic that I would give you a set of bones that you'd originally
contributed."
TenSoon frowned.
What?
And then he made
the connection. The body that TenSoon had created around the bones
must look convincing—as if it were the original one that these
bones had belonged to. VarSell assumed that TenSoon had been able to
create such a realistic approximation because he'd originally
digested the human's corpse, and therefore knew how to create the
right body around the bones.
TenSoon smiled.
"I've never worn these bones before."
VarSell eyed him.
He was of the Fifth Generation—two centuries younger than
TenSoon. Indeed, even among those of the Third Generation, few kandra
had as much experience with the outside world as TenSoon.
"I see,"
VarSell finally said.
TenSoon turned,
looking over the small chamber. Three more Fifth Generationers stood
near the door, watching him. Like VarSell, few of them wore
clothing—and those who did wore only open-fronted robes. Kandra
tended to wear little while in the Homeland, as that allowed them to
better display their True Bodies.
TenSoon saw two
sparkling rods of metal embedded in the clear muscles of each Fifth's
shoulders—all three had the Blessing of Potency. The Second
Generation was taking no risk of his escaping. It was, of course,
another insult. TenSoon had come to his fate willingly.
"Well?"
TenSoon asked, turning back to VarSell. "Are we to go?"
VarSell glanced at
one of his companions. "Forming the body was expected to take
you longer."
TenSoon snorted.
"The Second Generation is unpracticed. They assume that because
it still takes them many hours to create a body, the rest of us
require the same amount of time."
"They are your
elder generation," VarSell said. "You should show them
respect."
"The Second
Generation has been sequestered in these caves for centuries,"
TenSoon said, "sending the rest of us to serve Contracts while
they remain lazy. I passed them in skill long ago."
VarSell hissed, and
for a moment TenSoon thought the younger kandra might slap him.
VarSell restrained himself, barely—to TenSoon's amusement.
After all, as a member of the Third Generation, TenSoon was senior to
VarSell—much in the same way that the Seconds were supposedly
senior to TenSoon.
Yet, the Thirds
were a special case. They always had been. That's why the Seconds
kept them out on Contracts so much—it wouldn't do to have their
immediate underlings around all the time, upsetting their perfect
little kandra utopia.
"Let's go,
then," VarSell finally decided, nodding for two of his guards to
lead the way. The other one joined VarSell, walking behind TenSoon.
Like VarSell, these three had True Bodies formed of stone. Those were
popular among the Fifth Generation, who had time to commission—and
use—lavish True Bodies. They were the favored pups of the
Seconds, and tended to spend more time than most in the Homeland.
They had given
TenSoon no clothing. So, as they walked, he dissolved his genitals,
and re-formed a smooth crotch, as was common among the kandra. He
tried to walk with pride and confidence, but he knew this body
wouldn't look very intimidating. It was emaciated—he'd lost
much mass during his imprisonment and more to the acid, and he hadn't
been able to form very large muscles.
The smooth, rock
tunnel had probably once been a natural formation, but over the
centuries, the younger generations had been used during their infancy
to smooth out the stone with their digestive juices. TenSoon didn't
see many other kandra. VarSell kept to back corridors, obviously not
wanting to make too much of a show.
I've been away
so long, TenSoon thought. The Eleventh Generation must have
been chosen by now. I still don't know most of the Eighth, let alone
the Ninth or Tenth .
He was beginning to
suspect that there wouldn't be a Twelfth Generation. Even if there
were, things could not continue as they had. The Father was dead.
What, then, of the First Contract? His people had spent ten centuries
enslaved to humankind, serving the Contracts in an effort to keep
themselves safe. Most of the kandra hated men for their situation. Up
until recently, TenSoon had been one of those.
It's ironic,
TenSoon thought. But, even when we wear True Bodies, we wear
them in the form of humans. Two arms, two legs, even faces formed
after the fashion of mankind .
Sometimes he
wondered if the unbirthed—the creatures that the humans called
mistwraiths—were more honest than their brothers the kandra.
The mistwraiths would form a body however they wished, connecting
bones in odd arrangements, making almost artistic designs from both
human and animal bones. The kandra, though—they created bodies
that looked human. Even while they cursed humankind for keeping them
enslaved.
Such a strange
people they were. But they were his. Even if he had betrayed them.
And now I have
to convince the First Generation that I was right in that betrayal.
Not for me. For them. For all of us .
They passed through
corridors and chambers, eventually arriving at sections of the
Homeland that were more familiar to TenSoon. He soon realized that
their destination must be the Trustwarren. He would argue his defense
in his people's most sacred place. He should have guessed.
A year of torturous
imprisonment had earned him a trial before the First Generation. He'd
had a year to think about what to say. And if he failed, he'd have an
eternity to think about what he'd done wrong.

It is too easy
for people to characterize Ruin as simply a force of destruction.
Think rather of Ruin as intelligent decay. Not simply chaos, but a
force that sought in a rational—and dangerous—way to
break everything down to its most basic forms .
Ruin could plan
and carefully plot, knowing if he built one thing up, he could use it
to knock down two others. The nature of the world is that when we
create something, we often destroy something else in the process .





8
ON THE
FIRST DAY OUT OF VETITAN, Vin and Elend murdered a hundred
of the villagers. Or, at least, that was how Vin felt.
She sat on a
rotting stump at the center of camp, watching the sun approach the
distant horizon, knowing what was about to happen. Ash fell silently
around her. And the mists appeared.
Once—not so
long ago—the mists had come only at night. During the year
following the Lord Ruler's death, however, that had changed. As if a
thousand years of being confined to the darkness had made the mists
restless.
And so, they had
begun to come during the day. Sometimes, they came in great rolling
waves, appearing out of nowhere, disappearing as quickly. Most
commonly, however, they just appeared in the air like a thousand
phantoms, twisting and growing together. Tendrils of mist that
sprouted, vine-like tentacles creeping across the sky. Each day, they
retreated a little bit later in the day, and each day they appeared a
little earlier in the evening. Soon—perhaps before the year
ended—they would smother the land permanently. And this
presented a problem, for ever since that night when Vin had taken the
power of the Well of Ascension, the mists killed.
Elend had had
trouble believing Sazed's stories two years before, when the
Terrisman had come to Luthadel with horrific reports of terrified
villagers and mists that killed. Vin too had assumed that Sazed was
mistaken. A part of her wished she could continue in that delusion as
she watched the waiting townspeople, huddled together on the broad
open plain, surrounded by soldiers and koloss.
The deaths began as
soon as the mists appeared. Though the mists left most of the people
alone, they chose some at random, causing them to begin shaking.
These fell to the ground, having a seizure, while their friends and
family watched in shock and horror.
Horror was still
Vin's reaction. That, and frustration. Kelsier had promised her that
the mists were an ally—that they would protect her and give her
power. She'd believed that to be true until the mists started to feel
alien to her, hiding shadowed ghosts and murderous intent.
"I hate you,"
she whispered as the mists continued their grisly work. It was like
watching a beloved old relative pick strangers out of a crowd and,
one at a time, slit their throats. And there was nothing at all she
could do. Elend's scholars had tried everything—hoods to keep
the mists from being breathed in, waiting to go outside until the
mists had already established themselves, rushing people inside the
moment they started shaking. Animals were immune for some reason, but
every human was potentially susceptible. If one went outside in the
mists, one risked death, and nothing could prevent it.
It was over soon.
The mists gave the fits to fewer than one in six, and only a small
fraction of those died. Plus, one only needed to risk these new mists
once—one gamble, and then you were immune. Most who fell sick
would recover. That was no comfort to the families of those who died.
She sat on her
stump, staring out into the mists, which were still lit by the
setting sun. Ironically, it was more difficult for her to see than it
would have been if it were dark. She couldn't burn much tin, lest the
sunlight blind her—but without it, she couldn't pierce the
mists.
The result was a
scene that reminded her why she had once feared the mists. Her
visibility reduced to barely ten feet, she could see little more than
shadows. Amorphous figures ran this way and that, calling out.
Silhouettes knelt or stood terrified. Sound was a traitorous thing,
echoing against unseen objects, cries coming from phantom sources.
Vin sat among them,
ash raining around her like burnt tears, and bowed her head.
"Lord Fatren!"
Elend's voice called, causing Vin to look up. Once, his voice hadn't
carried nearly as much authority. That seemed like so long ago. He
appeared from the mists, dressed in his second white uniform—the
one that was still clean—his face hardened against the
mortalities. She could feel his Allomantic touch on those around him
as he approached—his Soothing would make the people's pain less
acute, but he didn't Push as hard as he could have. She knew from
talking to him that he didn't feel it was right to remove all of a
person's grief at the death of one they loved.
"My lord!"
she heard Fatren say, and saw him approaching. "This is a
disaster!"
"It looks far
worse than it is, Lord Fatren," Elend said. "As I
explained, most of those who have fallen will recover."
Fatren stopped
beside Vin's stump. Then, he turned and stared into the mists,
listening to the weeping and the pain of his people. "I can't
believe we did this. I can't . . . I can't believe you talked me into
making them stand in the mists."
"Your people
needed to be inoculated, Fatren," Elend said.
It was true. They
didn't have tents for all of the townsfolk, and that left only two
options. Leave them behind in their dying village, or force them
north—make them go out in the mists, and see who died. It was
terrible, and it was brutal, but it would have happened eventually.
Still, even though she knew the logic of what they had done, Vin felt
terrible for being part of it.
"What kind of
monsters are we?" Fatren asked in a hushed tone.
"The kind we
have to be," Elend said. "Go make a count. Find out how
many are dead. Calm the living and promise them that no further harm
will come from the mists."
"Yes, my
lord," Fatren said, moving away.
Vin watched him go.
"We murdered them, Elend," she whispered. "We told
them it would be all right. We forced them to leave their village and
come out here, to die."
"It will be
all right," Elend said, laying a hand on her shoulder. "Better
than a slow death in that village."
"We could have
given them a choice."
Elend shook his
head. "There was no choice. Within a few months, their city will
be covered in mists permanently. They would have had to stay inside
their homes and starve, or go out into the mists. Better that we take
them to the Central Dominance, where there is still enough mistless
daylight to grow crops."
"The truth
doesn't make it any easier."
Elend stood in the
mists, ash falling around him. "No," he said. "It
doesn't. I'll go gather the koloss so they can bury the dead."
"And the
wounded?" Those the mists attacked, but didn't kill, would be
sick and cramped for several days, perhaps longer. If the usual
percentages held, then nearly a thousand of the villagers would fall
into that category.
"When we leave
tomorrow, we'll have the koloss carry them. If we can get to the
canal, then we can probably fit most of them on the barges."
Vin didn't like
feeling exposed. She'd spent her childhood hiding in corners, her
adolescence playing the silent nighttime assassin. So it was
incredibly difficult not to feel exposed while traveling
with five thousand tired villagers along one of the Southern
Dominance's most obvious routes.
She walked a short
distance away from the townspeople—she never rode—and
tried to find something to distract herself from thinking about the
deaths the evening before. Unfortunately, Elend was riding with
Fatren and the other town leaders, busy trying to smooth relations.
That left her alone.
Except for her
single koloss.
The massive beast
lumbered beside her. She kept it close partially out of convenience;
she knew it would make the villagers keep their distance from her. As
willing as she was to be distracted, she didn't want to deal with
those betrayed, frightened eyes. Not right now.
Nobody understood
the koloss, least of all Vin. She'd discovered how to control them,
using the hidden Allomantic trigger. Yet, during the thousand years
of the Lord Ruler's reign, he had kept the koloss separated from
mankind, letting very little be known about them beyond their brutal
prowess in battle and their simple bestial nature.
Even now, Vin could
feel her koloss tugging at her, trying to break free. It didn't like
being controlled—it wanted to attack her. It could not,
fortunately; she controlled it, and would continue to do so whether
awake or asleep, burning metals or not, unless someone stole the
beast from her.
Even linked as they
were, there was so much Vin didn't understand about the creatures.
She looked up, and found the koloss staring at her with its bloodred
eyes. Its skin was stretched tight across its face, the nose pulled
completely flat. The skin was torn near the right eye, and a jagged
rip ran down to the corner of its mouth, letting a flap of blue skin
hang free, exposing the red muscles and bloodied teeth below.
"Don't look at
me," the creature said, speaking in a sluggish voice. Its words
were slurred, partially from the way its lips were pulled.
"What?"
Vin asked.
"You don't
think I'm human," the koloss said, speaking slowly,
deliberately—like the others she had heard. It was like they
had to think hard between each word.
"You aren't
human," Vin said. "You're something else."
"I will be
human," the koloss said. "We will kill you. Take your
cities. Then we will be human."
Vin shivered. It
was a common theme among koloss. She'd heard others make similar
remarks. There was something very chilling about the flat,
emotionless way the koloss spoke of slaughtering people.
They were
created by the Lord Ruler, she thought. Of course they're
twisted. As twisted as he was .
"What is your
name?" she asked the koloss.
It continued to
lumber beside her. Finally, it looked at her. "Human."
"I know you
want to be human," Vin said. "What is your name?"
"That is my
name. Human. You call me Human."
Vin frowned as they
walked. That almost seemed . . . clever. She'd never taken
the opportunity to talk to koloss before. She'd always assumed that
they were of a homogeneous mentality—just the same stupid beast
repeated over and over.
"All right,
Human," she said, curious. "How long have you been alive?"
He walked for a
moment, so long that Vin thought he had forgotten the question.
Finally, however, he spoke. "Don't you see my bigness?"
"Your bigness?
Your size?"
Human just kept
walking.
"So you all
grow at the same rate?"
He didn't answer.
Vin shook her head, suspecting that the question was too abstract for
the beast.
"I'm bigger
than some," Human said. "Smaller than some—but not
very many. That means I'm old."
Another sign of
intelligence, she thought, raising an eyebrow. From what Vin had
seen of other koloss, Human's logic was impressive.
"I hate you,"
Human said after a short time spent walking. "I want to kill
you. But I can't kill you."
"No," Vin
said. "I won't let you."
"You're big
inside. Very big."
"Yes,"
Vin said. "Human, where are the girl koloss?"
The creature walked
several moments. "Girl?"
"Like me,"
Vin said.
"We're not
like you," he said. "We're big on the outside only."
"No," Vin
said. "Not my size. My . . ." How did one describe gender?
Short of stripping, she couldn't think of any methods. So, she
decided to try a different tactic. "Are there baby koloss?"
"Baby?"
"Small ones,"
Vin said.
The koloss pointed
toward the marching koloss army. "Small ones," he said,
referring to some of the five-foot-tall koloss.
"Smaller,"
Vin said.
"None
smaller."
Koloss reproduction
was a mystery that, to her knowledge, nobody had ever cracked. Even
after a year spent fighting with the beasts, she'd never found out
where new ones came from. Whenever Elend's koloss armies grew too
small, she and he stole new ones from the Inquisitors.
Yet, it was
ridiculous to assume that the koloss didn't reproduce. She'd seen
koloss camps that weren't controlled by an Allomancer, and the
creatures killed each other with fearful regularity. At that rate,
they would have killed themselves off after a few years. Yet, they
had lasted for ten centuries.
That implied a very
quick rise from child to adult, or so Sazed and Elend seemed to
think. They hadn't been able to confirm their theories, and she knew
their ignorance frustrated Elend greatly—especially since his
duties as emperor left him little time for the studies he'd once
enjoyed so much.
"If there are
none smaller," Vin asked, "then where do new koloss come
from?"
"New koloss
come from us," Human finally said.
"From you?"
Vin asked, frowning as she walked. "That doesn't tell me much."
Human didn't say
anything further. His talkative mood had apparently passed.
From us, Vin
thought. They bud off of each other, perhaps? She'd heard of
some creatures that, if you cut them the right way, each half would
grow into a new animal. But, that couldn't be the case with
koloss—she'd seen battlefields filled with their dead, and no
pieces rose to form new koloss. But she'd also never seen a female
koloss. Though most of the beasts wore crude loincloths, they were—as
far as she knew—all male.
Further speculation
was cut off as she noticed the line ahead bunching up; the crowd was
slowing. Curious, she dropped a coin and left Human behind, shooting
herself over the people. The mists had retreated hours ago, and
though night was again approaching, for the moment it was both light
and mistless.
Therefore, as she
shot through the falling ash, she easily picked out the canal up
ahead. It cut unnaturally through the ground, far straighter than any
river. Elend speculated that the constant ashfall would soon put an
end to most of the canal systems. Without skaa laborers to dredge
them on a regular basis, they would fill up with ashen sediment,
eventually clogging to uselessness.
Vin soared through
the air, completing her arc, heading toward a large mass of tents
stationed beside the canal. Thousands of fires spit smoke into the
afternoon air, and men milled about, training, working, or preparing.
Nearly fifty thousand soldiers bivouacked here, using the canal route
as a supply line back to Luthadel.
Vin dropped another
coin, bounding through the air again. She quickly caught up to the
small group of horses that had broken off from Elend's line of tired,
marching skaa. She landed—dropping a coin and Pushing against
it slightly to slow her descent, throwing up a spray of ash as she
hit.
Elend reined in his
horse, smiling as he surveyed the camp. The expression was rare
enough on his lips these days that Vin found herself smiling as well.
Ahead, a group of men waited for them—their scouts would have
long since noticed the townspeople's approach.
"Lord Elend!"
said a man sitting at the head of the army contingent. "You're
ahead of schedule!"
"I assume
you're ready anyway, General," Elend said, dismounting.
"Well, you
know me," Demoux said, smiling as he approached. The general
wore well-used armor of leather and steel, his face bearing a scar on
one cheek, the left side of his scalp missing a large patch of hair
where a koloss blade had nearly taken his head. Ever formal, the
grizzled man bowed to Elend, who just slapped him on the shoulder
affectionately.
Vin's smile
lingered. I remember when that man was little more than a fresh
recruit standing frightened in a tunnel. Demoux wasn't actually
that much older than she was, even though his tanned face and
callused hands gave that impression.
"We've held
position, my lord," Demoux said as Fatren and his brother
dismounted and joined the group. "Not that there was much to
hold it against. Still, it was good for my men to practice fortifying
a camp."
Indeed, the army's
camp beside the canal was surrounded by heaped earth and spikes—a
considerable feat, considering the army's size.
"You did well,
Demoux," Elend said, turning back to look over the townspeople.
"Our mission was a success."
"I can see
that, my lord," Demoux said, smiling. "That's a fair pack
of koloss you picked up. I hope the Inquisitor leading them wasn't
too sad to see them go."
"Couldn't have
bothered him too much," Elend said. "Since he was dead at
the time. We found the storage cavern as well."
"Praise the
Survivor!" Demoux said.
Vin frowned. At his
neck, hanging outside his clothing, Demoux wore a necklace that bore
a small silver spear: the increasingly popular symbol of the Church
of the Survivor. It seemed odd to her that the weapon that had killed
Kelsier would become the symbol of his followers.
Of course, she
didn't like to think about the other possibility—that the spear
might not represent the one that had killed Kelsier. It might very
well represent the one that she herself had used to kill the Lord
Ruler. She'd never asked Demoux which it was. Despite three years of
growing Church power, Vin had never become comfortable with her own
part in its doctrine.
"Praise the
Survivor indeed," Elend said, looking over the army's supply
barges. "How did your project go?"
"Dredging the
southern bend?" Demoux asked. "It went well—there was
blessed little else to do while we waited. You should be able to get
barges through there now."
"Good,"
Elend said. "Form two task forces of five hundred men. Send one
with barges back to Vetitan for the supplies we had to leave down in
that cavern. They will transfer the supplies to the barges and send
them up to Luthadel."
"Yes, my
lord," Demoux said.
"Send the
second group of soldiers north to Luthadel with these refugees,"
Elend said, nodding to Fatren. "This is Lord Fatren. He's in
command of the townspeople. Have your men respect his wishes, as long
as they are reasonable, and introduce him to Lord Penrod."
Once—not long
ago—Fatren would probably have complained about being handed
off. However, his time with Elend had transformed him surprisingly
quickly. The dirty leader nodded gratefully at the escort. "You
. . . aren't coming with us then, my lord?"
Elend shook his
head. "I have other work to do, and your people need to get to
Luthadel, where they can begin farming. Though, if any of your men
wish to join my army, they are welcome. I'm always in need of good
troops, and against the odds, you succeeded in training a useful
force."
"My lord . . .
why not just compel them? Pardon me, but that's what you've done so
far."
"I compelled
your people to safety, Fatren," Elend said. "Sometimes even
a drowning man will fight the one who tries to save him and must be
compelled. My army is a different matter. Men who don't want to fight
are men you can't depend on in battle, and I won't have any of those
in my army. You yourself need to go to Luthadel—your people
need you—but please let your soldiers know that I will gladly
welcome any of them into our ranks."
Fatren nodded. "All
right. And . . . thank you, my lord."
"You are
welcome. Now, General Demoux, are Sazed and Breeze back yet?"
"They should
arrive sometime this evening, my lord," Demoux said. "One
of their men rode ahead to let us know."
"Good,"
Elend said. "I assume my tent is ready?"
"Yes, my
lord," Demoux said.
Elend nodded,
suddenly looking very tired to Vin.
"My lord?"
Demoux asked eagerly. "Did you find the . . . other item? The
location of the final cache?"
Elend nodded. "It's
in Fadrex."
"Cett's city?"
Demoux asked, laughing. "Well, he'll be happy to hear that. He's
been complaining for over a year that we haven't ever gotten around
to conquering it back for him."
Elend smiled wanly.
"I've been half convinced that if we did, Cett would decide that
he—and his soldiers—didn't need us anymore."
"He'll stay,
my lord," Demoux said. "After the scare Lady Vin gave him
last year . . ."
Demoux glanced at
Vin, trying to smile, but she saw it in his eyes. Respect, far too
much of it. He didn't joke with her the way he did with Elend. She
still couldn't believe that Elend had joined that silly religion of
theirs. Elend's intentions had been political—by joining the
skaa faith, Elend had forged a link between himself and the common
people. Even so, the move made her uncomfortable.
A year of marriage
had taught her, however, that there were some things one just had to
ignore. She could love Elend for his desire to do the right thing,
even when she thought he'd done the opposite.
"Call a
meeting this evening, Demoux," Elend said. "We have much to
discuss—and let me know when Sazed arrives."
"Should I
inform Lord Hammond and the others of the meeting's agenda, my lord?"
Elend paused,
glancing toward the ashen sky. "Conquering the world, Demoux,"
he finally said. "Or, at least, what's left of it."

Allomancy was,
indeed, born with the mists. Or, at least, Allomancy began at the
same time as the mists' first appearances. When Rashek took the power
at the Well of Ascension, he became aware of certain things. Some
were whispered to him by Ruin; others were granted to him as an
instinctive part of the power .
One of these
was an understanding of the Three Metallic Arts. He knew, for
instance, that the nuggets of metal in the Chamber of Ascension would
make those who ingested them into Mistborn. These were, after all,
fractions of the very power in the Well itself .





9
TENSOON HAD
VISITED the Trustwarren before; he was of the Third
Generation. He had been born seven centuries ago, when the kandra
were still new—though by that time, the First Generation had
already given over the raising of new kandra to the Second
Generation.
The Seconds hadn't
done very well with TenSoon's generation—or, at least, that was
how the Seconds felt. They'd wanted to form a society of individuals
who followed strict rules of respect and seniority. A "perfect"
people who lived to serve their Contracts—and, of course, the
members of the Second Generation.
Up until his
return, TenSoon had generally been considered one of the least
troublesome of the Thirds. He'd been known as a kandra who cared
little for Homeland politics; one who served out his Contracts,
content to keep himself as far away from the Seconds and their
machinations as possible. It was ironic indeed that TenSoon would end
up on trial for the most heinous of kandra crimes.
His guards marched
him right into the center of the Trustwarren—onto the platform
itself. TenSoon wasn't certain whether to be honored or ashamed. Even
as a member of the Third Generation, he hadn't often been allowed so
near the Trust.
The room was large
and circular, with metal walls. The platform was a massive steel disk
set into the rock floor. It wasn't very high—perhaps a foot
tall—but it was ten feet in diameter. TenSoon's feet felt cold
hitting its slick surface, and he was reminded again of his nudity.
They didn't bind his hands; that would have been too much of an
insult even for him. Kandra obeyed the Contract, even those of the
Third Generation. He would not run, and he would not strike down one
of his own. He was better than that.
The room was lit by
lamps, rather than glowstone, though each lamp was enclosed in blue
glass. Oil was difficult to get—the Second Generation, for good
reason, didn't want to rely on supplies from the world of men. The
people above, even most of the Father's servants, didn't know there
was a centralized kandra government. It was much better that way.
In the blue light,
TenSoon could easily see the members of the Second Generation—all
twenty of them, standing behind their lecterns, arranged in tiers on
the far side of the room. They were close enough to see, study, and
speak to—yet far enough away that TenSoon felt isolated,
standing alone in the center of the platform. His feet were cold. He
looked down, and noticed the small hole in the floor near his toes.
It was cut into the steel disk of the platform.
The Trust, he
thought. It was directly underneath him.
"TenSoon of
the Third Generation," a voice said.
TenSoon looked up.
It was KanPaar, of course. He was a tall kandra—or, rather, he
preferred to use a tall True Body. Like all of the Seconds, his bones
were constructed of the purest crystal—his with a deep red
tint. It was an impractical body in many ways. Those bones wouldn't
stand up to much punishment. Yet, for the life of an administrator in
the Homeland, the weakness of the bones was apparently an acceptable
trade-off for their sparkling beauty.
"I am here,"
TenSoon said.
"You insist on
forcing this trial?" KanPaar said, keeping his voice lofty,
reinforcing his thick accent. By staying away from humans for so
long, his language hadn't been corrupted by their dialects. The
Seconds' accents were similar to that of the Father, supposedly.
"Yes,"
TenSoon said.
KanPaar sighed
audibly, standing behind his fine stone lectern. Finally, he bowed
his head toward the upper reaches of the room. The First Generation
watched from above. They sat in their individual alcoves running
around the perimeter of the upper room, shadowed to the point where
they were little more than humanoid lumps. They did not speak. That
was for the Seconds.
The doors behind
TenSoon opened, and hushed voices sounded, feet rustling. He turned,
smiling to himself as he watched them enter. Kandra of various sizes
and ages. The very youngest ones wouldn't be allowed to attend an
event this important, but those of the adult generations—everyone
up through the Ninth Generation—could not be denied. This was
his victory, perhaps the only one he would have in the entire trial.
If he was to be
condemned to endless imprisonment, then he wanted his people to know
the truth. More important, he wanted them to hear this trial, to hear
what he had to say. He would not convince the Second Generation, and
who knew what the Firsts would silently think, sitting in their
shadowed alcoves? The younger kandra, however . . . perhaps they
would listen. Perhaps they would do something, once TenSoon was gone.
He watched them file in, filling the stone benches. There were
hundreds of kandra now. The elder generations—Firsts, Seconds,
Thirds—were small in number, since many had been killed in the
early days, when the humans had feared them. However, later
generations were well populated—the Tenth Generation had over a
hundred individuals in it. The Trustwarren's benches had been
constructed to hold the entire kandra population, but they were now
filled just by those who happened to be free from both duty and
Contract.
He had hoped that
MeLaan wouldn't be in that group. Yet, she was virtually the first in
the doors. For a moment, he worried that she'd rush across the
chamber—stepping on the platform, where only the most blessed
or cursed were allowed. Instead, she froze just inside the doorway,
forcing others to push around her in annoyance as they found seats.
He shouldn't have
recognized her. She had a new True Body—an eccentric one, with
bones made of wood. They were thin and willowy in an exaggerated,
unnatural way: her wooden skull long with a pointed triangular chin,
her eyes too large, twisted bits of cloth sticking from her head like
hair. The younger generations were pushing the boundaries of
propriety, annoying the Seconds. Once, TenSoon would probably have
agreed with them—even now, he was something of a
traditionalist. Yet, this day, her rebellious body simply made him
smile.
That seemed to give
her comfort, and she found a seat, near the front, with a group of
other Seventh Generationers. They all had deformed True Bodies—one
too much like a block, another actually sporting four arms.
"TenSoon of
the Third Generation," KanPaar said formally, quieting the crowd
of watching kandra. "You have obstinately demanded judgment
before the First Generation. By the First Contract, we cannot condemn
you without first allowing you the opportunity to plead before the
Firsts. Should they see fit to stay your punishment, you will be
freed. Otherwise, you must accept the fate the Council of Seconds
assigns you."
"I
understand," TenSoon said.
"Then,"
KanPaar said, leaning forward on his lectern. "Let us begin."
He's not
worried at all, TenSoon realized. He actually sounds like
he's going to enjoy this .
And why not?
After centuries of preaching that the Third Generation is filled with
miscreants? They've tried all this time to overcome their mistakes
with us—mistakes like giving us too much freedom, letting us
think that we were as good as they were. By proving that I—the
most "temperate" of the Thirds—am a danger, KanPaar
will win a struggle he's been fighting for most of his life .
TenSoon had always
found it strange how threatened the Seconds felt by the Thirds. It
had taken them only one generation to understand their mistakes—the
Fourths were nearly as loyal as the Fifths, with only a few deviant
members.
And yet, with some
of the younger generations—MeLaan and her friends providing an
example—acting as they did . . . well, perhaps the Seconds had
a right to feel threatened. And TenSoon was to be their sacrifice.
Their way of restoring order and orthodoxy.
They were certainly
in for a surprise.

Nuggets of pure
Allomancy, the power of Preservation itself. Why Rashek left one of
those nuggets at the Well of Ascension, I do not know. Perhaps he
didn't see it, or perhaps he intended to save it to bestow upon a
fortunate servant .
Perhaps he
feared that someday, he would lose his powers, and would need that
nugget to grant him Allomancy. Either way, I bless Rashek for his
oversight, for without that nugget, Elend would have died that day at
the Well .





10
LARSTAISM
WAS A DIFFICULT one for Sazed to measure. The religion
seemed innocent enough. They knew much about it; a Keeper during the
fourth century had managed to uncover an entire trove of prayer
materials, scriptures, notes, and writings which had once belonged to
a high-ranking member of the religion.
And yet, the
religion itself didn't seem very . . . well, religious. It had
focused on art, not the sacred in the usual sense, and had centered
around donating money to support monks so that they could compose
poetry and paint and sculpt works of art. That, actually, blocked
Sazed's attempts to dismiss it, as he couldn't find any
contradictions in its doctrines. It just didn't have enough of those
for them to conflict with one another.
He held the paper
in front of him, shaking his head, reading over the sheet again. It
was strapped to the front of the portfolio to keep it from being
caught in the wind, and a parasol strapped to his saddle kept most of
the ash from smearing the page. He had heard Vin complain that she
didn't know how people could possibly read while riding a horse, but
this method made it rather easy.
He didn't have to
turn pages. He simply read the same words over and over, turning them
in his mind, playing with them. Trying to decide. Did this one have
the truth? It was the one that Mare, Kelsier's wife, had believed.
She'd been one of the few people Sazed had ever met who had chosen to
believe in one of the old religions he had preached.
The Larsta
believed that life was about seeking the divine, he read. They
taught that art draws us closer to understanding divinity. Since not
all men can spend their time in art, it is to the benefit of society
as a whole to support a group of dedicated artists to create great
works, which then elevate those who experience them .
That was all well
and good, in Sazed's estimation, but what about questions of life and
death? What about the spirit? What was the divine, and how
could such terrible things happen to the world if divinity did exist?
"You know,"
Breeze said from the saddle of his horse, "there's something
amazing about all of this."
The comment broke
Sazed's concentration. He sighed, looking up from his research. The
horse continued to clop along beneath him. "Amazing about what,
Lord Breeze?"
"The ash,"
Breeze said. "I mean, look at it. Covering everything, making
the land look so black. It's simply astounding how dreary
the landscape has become. Back in the Lord Ruler's reign, everything
was brown, and most plants grown outdoors looked as if they were on
the very edge of sickly death. I thought that was
depressing. But ash falling every day, burying the entire land . . ."
The Soother shook his head, smiling. "I wouldn't have thought it
possible for things to actually be worse without the Lord Ruler. But,
well, we've certainly made a mess! Destroying the world. That's no
mean feat, if you think about it. I wonder if we should be impressed
with ourselves."
Sazed frowned.
Occasional flakes drifted from the sky, the upper atmosphere darkened
by its usual dark haze. The ashfall was light, if persistent, falling
steadily for nearly two months now. Their horses moved through a good
half-foot of the stuff as they moved southward, accompanied by a
hundred of Elend's soldiers. How long would it be before the ash grew
so deep that travel was impossible? It already drifted several feet
high in some places.
Everything was
black—the hills, the road, the entire countryside. Trees
drooped with the weight of ash on their leaves and branches. Most of
the ground foliage was likely dead—bringing even two horses
with them on the trip to Lekal City had been difficult, for there was
nothing for them to graze on. The soldiers had been forced to carry
feed.
"I do have to
say, however," Breeze continued, chatting along in his normal
way, protected from the ash by a parasol attached to the back of his
saddle, "the ash is a tad unimaginative."
"Unimaginative?"
"Why, yes,"
Breeze said. "While I do happen to like black as a color for
suits, I otherwise find it a somewhat uninspired hue."
"What else
would the ash be?"
Breeze shrugged.
"Well, Vin says that there's something behind all this, right?
Some evil force of doom or whatever? Well, if I were said
force of doom, then I certainly wouldn't have used my powers to turn
the land black. It just lacks flair. Red. Now, that would be
an interesting color. Think of the possibilities—if the ash
were red, the rivers would run like blood. Black is so monotonous
that you can forget about it, but red—you'd always be thinking,
'Why, look at that. That hill is red. That evil force of doom trying
to destroy me certainly has style.' "
"I'm not
convinced there is any 'evil force of doom,' Breeze," Sazed
said.
"Oh?"
Sazed shook his
head. "The ashmounts have always spewed out ash. Is it
really that much of a stretch to assume that they have become more
active than before? Perhaps this is all the result of natural
processes."
"And the
mists?"
"Weather
patterns change, Lord Breeze," Sazed said. "Perhaps it was
simply too warm during the day for them to come out before. Now that
the ashmounts are emitting more ash, it would make sense that the
days are growing colder, and so the mists stay longer."
"Oh? And if
that were the case, my dear man, then why haven't the mists stayed
out during the day in the winters? It was colder then than the
summer, but the mists always left when day arrived."
Sazed grew silent.
Breeze made a good point. Yet, as Sazed checked each new religion off
of his list, he wondered more and more if they were simply creating
an enemy in this "force" Vin had felt. He didn't know
anymore. He didn't believe for a moment that she would have
fabricated her stories. Yet, if there were no truth in the religions,
was it too much of a stretch to infer that the world was simply
ending because it was time?
"Green,"
Breeze finally said.
Sazed turned.
"Now, that
would be a color with style," Breeze said. "Different. You
can't see green and forget about it—not like you can black or
brown. Wasn't Kelsier always talking about plants being green, once?
Before the Ascension of the Lord Ruler, before the first time the
Deepness came upon the land?"
"That's what
the histories claim."
Breeze nodded
thoughtfully. "Style indeed," he said. "It would be
pretty, I think."
"Oh?"
Sazed asked, genuinely surprised. "Most people with whom I have
spoken seem to find the concept of green plants rather odd."
"I thought
that once, but now, after seeing black all day, every day . . . Well,
I think a little variety would be nice. Fields of green . . . little
specks of color . . . what did Kelsier call those?"
"Flowers,"
Sazed said. The Larsta had written poems about them.
"Yes,"
Breeze said. "It will be nice when those return."
"Return?"
Breeze shrugged.
"Well, the Church of the Survivor teaches that Vin will someday
cleanse the sky of ash and the air of mists. I figure while she's at
it, she might as well bring back the plants and the flowers. Seems
like a suitably feminine thing to do, for some reason."
Sazed sighed,
shaking his head. "Lord Breeze," he said, "I realize
that you are simply trying to encourage me. However, I have serious
trouble believing that you accept the teachings of the
Church of the Survivor."
Breeze hesitated.
Then, he smiled. "So I overdid it a bit, did I?"
"A tad."
"It's
difficult to tell with you, my dear man. You're so aware of my touch
on your emotions that I can't use much Allomancy, and you've been so
. . . well, different lately." Breeze's voice grew wistful.
"Still, it would be nice to see those green plants our Kelsier
always spoke of. After six months of ash . . . well, it makes a man
at least want to believe. Perhaps that's enough for an old
hypocrite like me."
The sense of
despair inside Sazed wanted to snap that simply believing
wasn't enough. Wishing and believing hadn't gotten him anywhere. It
wouldn't change the fact that the plants were dying and the world was
ending.
It wasn't worth
fighting, because nothing meant anything.
Sazed forced
himself to stop that line of thought, but it was difficult. He
worried, sometimes, about his melancholy. Unfortunately, much of the
time, he had trouble summoning even the effort to care about his own
pessimistic bent.
The Larsta, he
told himself. Focus on that religion. You need to make a decision
.
Breeze's comments
had set Sazed thinking. The Larsta focused so much on beauty and art
as being "divine." Well, if divinity was in any way related
to art, then a god couldn't in any way be involved in what
was happening to the world. The ash, the dismal, depressing landscape
. . . it was more than just "unimaginative," as Breeze had
put it. It was completely insipid. Dull. Monotonous.
Religion not
true, Sazed wrote at the bottom of the paper. Teachings are
directly contradicted by observed events .
He undid the straps
on his portfolio and slipped the sheet in, one step closer to having
gone through all of them. Sazed could see Breeze watching out of the
corner of his eye; the Soother loved secrets. Sazed doubted the man
would be all that impressed if he discovered what the work was really
about. Either way, Sazed just wished that Breeze would leave him
alone when it came to these studies.
I shouldn't be
curt with him, though, Sazed thought. He knew the Soother was,
in his own way, just trying to help. Breeze had changed since they'd
first met. Early on—despite glimmers of compassion—Breeze
really had been the selfish, callous manipulator that he now only
pretended to be. Sazed suspected that Breeze had joined Kelsier's
team not out of a desire to help the skaa, but because of the
challenge the scheme had presented, not to mention the rich reward
Kelsier had promised.
That reward—the
Lord Ruler's atium cache—had proven to be a myth. Breeze had
found other rewards instead.
Up ahead, Sazed
noticed someone moving through the ash. The figure wore black, but
against the field of ash, it was easy to pick out even a hint of
flesh tone. It appeared to be one of their scouts. Captain Goradel
called the line to a halt, then sent a man forward to meet the scout.
Sazed and Breeze waited patiently.
"Scout report,
Lord Ambassador," Captain Goradel said, walking up to Sazed's
horse a short time later. "The emperor's army is just a few
hills away—less than an hour."
"Good,"
Sazed said, relishing the thought of seeing something other than the
dreary hills of black.
"They've
apparently seen us, Lord Ambassador," Goradel said. "Riders
are approaching. In fact, they are—"
"Here,"
Sazed said, nodding into the near distance, where he saw a rider
crest the hill. This one was very easy to pick out against the black.
Not only was it moving very quickly—actually galloping its poor
horse along the road—but it was also pink.
"Oh, dear,"
Breeze said with a sigh.
The bobbing figure
resolved into a young woman with golden hair, wearing a bright pink
dress—one that made her look younger than her twenty-something
years. Allrianne had a fondness for lace and frills, and she tended
to wear colors that made her stand out. Sazed might have expected
someone like her to be a poor equestrian. Allrianne, however, rode
with easy mastery, something one would need in order to remain on the
back of a galloping horse while wearing such a frivolous dress.
The young woman
reared her horse up in front of Sazed's soldiers, spinning the animal
in a flurry of ruffled fabric and golden hair. About to dismount, she
hesitated, eyeing the half-foot-deep layer of ash on the ground.
"Allrianne?"
Breeze asked after a moment of silence.
"Hush,"
she said. "I'm trying to decide if it's worth getting my dress
dirty to scamper over and hug you."
"We could wait
until we get back to the camp . . ."
"I couldn't
embarrass you in front of your soldiers that way," she said.
"Technically,
my dear," Breeze said, "they're not my soldiers at
all, but Sazed's."
Reminded of Sazed's
presence, Allrianne looked up. She smiled prettily toward Sazed, then
bent herself in a horseback version of a curtsy. "Lord
Ambassador," she said, and Sazed felt a sudden—and
unnatural—fondness for the young lady. She was Rioting him. If
there was anyone more brazen with their Allomantic powers than
Breeze, it was Allrianne.
"Princess,"
Sazed said, nodding his head to her.
Finally, Allrianne
made her decision and slipped off the horse. She didn't quite
"scamper"—instead, she held up her dress in a rather
unladylike fashion. It would have been immodest if she hadn't been
wearing what appeared to be several layers of lace petticoats
underneath.
Eventually, Captain
Goradel came over and helped her up onto Breeze's horse so that she
was sitting in the saddle in front of him. The two had never been
officially married—partially, perhaps, because Breeze felt
embarrassed to be in a relationship with a woman so much younger than
himself. When pressed on the issue, Breeze had explained that he
didn't want to leave her as a widow when he died—something he
seemed to assume would happen immediately, though he was only in his
mid-forties.
We'll all die
soon, the way things are going, Sazed thought. Our ages do
not matter .
Perhaps that was
part of why Breeze had finally accepted having a relationship with
Allrianne. Either way, it was obvious from the way he looked at
her—from the way he held her with a delicate, almost reverent
touch—that he loved her very much.
Our social
structure is breaking down, Sazed thought as the column began to
march again. Once, the official stamp of a marriage would have
been essential, especially in a relationship involving a young woman
of her rank .
And yet, who was
there to be "official" for now? The obligators were all but
extinct. Elend and Vin's government was a thing of wartime
necessity—a utilitarian, martially organized alliance of
cities. And looming over it all was the growing awareness that
something was seriously wrong with the world.
Why bother to get
married if you expected the world would end before the year was out?
Sazed shook his
head. This was a time when people needed structure—needed
faith—to keep them going. He should have been the one
to give it to them. The Church of the Survivor tried, but it was too
new, and its adherents were too inexperienced with religion. Already
there were arguments about doctrine and methodology, and each city of
the New Empire was developing its own mutant variant of the religion.
In the past, Sazed
had taught religions without feeling a need to believe in each one.
He'd accepted each as being special in its own way, and offered them
up, as a waiter might serve an appetizer he himself didn't feel like
eating.
Doing so now seemed
hypocritical to Sazed. If this people needed faith, then he should
not be the one to give it to them. He would not teach lies, not
anymore.
Sazed splashed his
face with the basin's cold water, enjoying the pleasurable shock. The
water dribbled down his cheeks and chin, carrying with it stains of
ash. He dried his face with a clean towel, then took out his razor
and mirror so that he could shave his head properly.
"Why do you
keep doing that?" asked an unexpected voice.
Sazed spun. His
tent in the camp had been empty just moments before. Now, however,
someone stood behind him. Sazed smiled. "Lady Vin."
She folded her
arms, raising an eyebrow. She had always moved stealthily, but she
was getting so good that it amazed even him. She'd barely rustled the
tent flap with her entrance. She wore her standard shirt and
trousers, after male fashion, though during the last two years she
had grown her raven hair to a feminine shoulder length. There had
been a time when Vin had seemed to crouch wherever she went, always
trying to hide, rarely looking others in the eye. That had changed.
She was still easy to miss, with her quiet ways, thin figure, and
small stature. She now always looked people in the eye, however.
And that made a big
difference.
"General
Demoux said that you were resting, Lady Vin," Sazed noted.
"Demoux knows
better than to let me sleep through your arrival."
Sazed smiled to
himself, then gestured toward a chair so that she could sit.
"You can keep
shaving," she said. "It's all right."
"Please,"
he said, gesturing again.
Vin sighed, taking
the seat. "You never answered my question, Saze," she said.
"Why do you keep wearing those steward's robes? Why do you keep
your head shaved, after the fashion of a Terris servant? Why worry
about showing disrespect by shaving while I'm here? You're not a
servant anymore."
He sighed,
carefully seating himself in the chair across from Vin. "I'm not
exactly sure what I am anymore, Lady Vin."
The tent walls
flapped in a gentle breeze, a bit of ash blowing in through the door,
which Vin hadn't tied closed behind herself. She frowned at his
comment. "You're Sazed."
"Emperor
Venture's chief ambassador."
"No," Vin
said. "That might be what you do, but that's not what
you are."
"And what am
I, then?"
"Sazed,"
she repeated. "Keeper of Terris."
"A Keeper who
no longer wears his copperminds?"
Vin glanced toward
the corner, toward the trunk where he kept them. His copperminds, the
Feruchemical storages that contained the religions, histories,
stories, and legends of peoples long dead. It all sat waiting to be
taught, waiting to be added to. "I fear that I have become a
very selfish man, Lady Vin," Sazed said quietly.
"That's
silly," Vin said. "You've spent your entire life serving
others. I know of nobody more selfless than you."
"I do
appreciate that sentiment," he said. "But I fear that I
must disagree. Lady Vin, we are not a people new to sorrow. You know
better than anyone here, I think, the hardships of life in the Final
Empire. We have all lost people dear to us. And yet, I seem to be the
only one unable to get over my loss. I feel childish. Yes, Tindwyl is
dead. In all honesty, I did not have much time with her before she
did pass. I have no reason to feel as I do.
"Still, I
cannot wake up in the morning and not see darkness ahead of me. When
I place the metalminds upon my arms, my skin feels cold, and I
remember time spent with her. Life lacks all hope. I should be able
to move on, but I cannot. I am weak of will, I think."
"That just
isn't true, Sazed," Vin said.
"I must
disagree."
"Oh?" Vin
asked. "And if you really were weak of will, would you be able
to disagree with me?"
Sazed paused, then
smiled. "When did you get so good at logic?"
"Living with
Elend," Vin said with a sigh. "If you prefer irrational
arguments, don't marry a scholar."
I almost did .
The thought came to Sazed unbidden, but it quieted his smile
nonetheless. Vin must have noticed, for she cringed slightly.
"Sorry,"
she said, looking away.
"It is all
right, Lady Vin," Sazed said. "I just . . . I feel so weak.
I cannot be the man my people wish me to be. I am, perhaps, the very
last of the Keepers. It has been a year since the Inquisitors
attacked my homeland, killing even the child Feruchemists, and we
have seen no evidence that others of my sect survived. Others were
out of the city, certainly and inevitably, but either Inquisitors
found them or other tragedy did. There has certainly been enough of
that lately, I think."
Vin sat with her
hands in her lap, looking uncharacteristically weak in the dim light.
Sazed frowned at the pained expression on her face. "Lady Vin?"
"I'm sorry,"
she said. "It's just that . . . you've always been the one who
gives advice, Sazed. But, now what I need advice about is you."
"There is no
advice to give, I fear."
They sat in silence
for a few moments.
"We found the
stockpile," Vin said. "The next-to-last cavern. I made a
copy for you of the words we found, etched in a thin sheet of steel
so they'll be safe."
"Thank you."
Vin sat, looking
uncertain. "You're not going to look at it, are you?"
Sazed paused, then
shook his head. "I do not know."
"I can't do
this alone, Sazed," Vin whispered. "I can't fight it by
myself. I need you."
The tent grew
quiet. "I . . . am doing what I can, Lady Vin," Sazed
finally said. "In my own way. I must find answers for myself
before I can provide them to anyone else. Still, have the etching
delivered to my tent. I promise that I will at least look at it."
She nodded, then
stood. "Elend's having a meeting tonight. To plan our next
moves. He wants you there." She trailed a faint perfume as she
moved to leave. She paused beside his chair. "There was a time,"
she said, "after I'd taken the power at the Well of Ascension,
when I thought Elend would die."
"But he did
not," Sazed said. "He lives still."
"It doesn't
matter," Vin said. "I thought him dead. I knew he was
dying—I held that power, Sazed, power you can't imagine.
Power you'll never be able to imagine. The power to destroy worlds
and remake them anew. The power to see and to understand. I saw him,
and I knew he would die. And knew I held the power in my hands to
save him."
Sazed looked up.
"But I
didn't," Vin said. "I let him bleed, and released the power
instead. I consigned him to death."
"How?"
Sazed asked. "How could you do such a thing?"
"Because I
looked into his eyes," Vin said, "and knew it was what he
wanted me to do. You gave me that, Sazed. You taught me to love him
enough to let him die."
She left him alone
in the tent. A few moments later, he returned to his shaving, and
found something sitting beside his basin. A small, folded piece of
paper.
It contained an
aged, fading drawing of a strange plant. A flower. The picture had
once belonged to Mare. It had gone from her to Kelsier, and from him
to Vin.
Sazed picked it up,
wondering what Vin intended to say by leaving him the picture.
Finally, he folded it up and slipped it into his sleeve, then
returned to his shaving.

The First
Contract, oft spoken of by the kandra, was originally just a series
of promises made by the First Generation to the Lord Ruler. They
wrote these promises down, and in doing so codified the first kandra
laws. They were worried about governing themselves, independently of
the Lord Ruler and his empire. So, they took what they had written to
him, asking for his approval .
He commanded it
cast into steel, then personally scratched a signature into the
bottom. This code was the first thing that a kandra learned upon
awakening from his or her life as a mistwraith. It contained commands
to revere earlier generations, simple legal rights granted to each
kandra, provisions for creating new kandra, and a demand for ultimate
dedication to the Lord Ruler .
Most
disturbingly, the First Contract contained a provision which, if
invoked, would require the mass suicide of the entire kandra people .





11
KANPAAR
LEANED FORWARD ON HIS LECTERN, red crystalline bones
sparkling in the lamplight. "All right, then, TenSoon, traitor
to the kandra people. You have demanded this judgment. Make your
plea."
TenSoon took a deep
breath—it felt so good to be able to do that again—and
opened his mouth to speak.
"Tell them,"
KanPaar continued, sneering, "explain, if you can, why you
killed one of our own. A fellow kandra."
TenSoon froze. The
Trustwarren was quiet—the generations of kandra were far too
well behaved to rustle and make noise like a crowd of humans. They
sat with their bones of rock, wood, or even metal, waiting for
TenSoon's answer.
KanPaar's question
wasn't the one TenSoon had expected.
"Yes, I killed
a kandra," TenSoon said, standing cold and naked on the
platform. "That is not forbidden."
"Need it be
forbidden?" KanPaar accused, pointing. "Humans kill each
other. Koloss kill each other. But they are both of Ruin. We
are of Preservation, the chosen of the Father himself. We don't kill
one another!"
TenSoon frowned.
This was a strange line of questioning. Why ask this? he
thought. My betrayal of all our people is surely a greater sin
than the murder of one.
"I was
compelled by my Contract," TenSoon said frankly. "You must
know, KanPaar. You are the one who assigned me to the man
Straff Venture. We all know what kind of person he was."
"No different
from any other man," spat one of the Seconds.
Once, TenSoon would
have agreed. Yet, he knew that there were some humans, at least, who
were different. He had betrayed Vin, and yet she hadn't
hated him for it. She had understood, and had felt mercy. Even if
they hadn't already become friends, even if he hadn't grown to
respect her greatly, that one moment would have earned her his
devoted loyalty.
She was counting on
him, even if she didn't know it. He stood a little straighter,
looking KanPaar in the eyes. "I was assigned to the man Straff
Venture by paid Contract," TenSoon said. "He gave me over
to the whims of his twisted son, Zane. It was Zane who commanded that
I kill the kandra OreSeur and take his place, so that I could spy on
the woman Vin."
There were a few
hushed whispers at her name. Yes, you've heard of her. The one
who slew the Father.
"And so you
did what this Zane commanded?" KanPaar asked loudly. "You
killed another kandra. You murdered a member of your own
generation!"
"You think I
enjoyed it?" TenSoon demanded. "OreSeur was my generation
brother—a kandra I had known for seven hundred years! But . . .
the Contract . . ."
"Forbids
killing," KanPaar said.
"It forbids
the killing of men."
"And is not a
kandra life worth more than that of a man?"
"The words are
specific, KanPaar," TenSoon snapped. "I know them well—I
helped write them! We were both there when these service Contracts
were created using the First Contract itself as a model! They forbid
us from killing humans, but not each other."
KanPaar leaned
forward again. "Did you argue with this Zane? Suggest perhaps
that he should perform the murder himself? Did you even try to get
out of killing one of our people?"
"I do not
argue with my masters," TenSoon said. "And I certainly
didn't want to tell the man Zane how to kill a kandra. His
instability was well known."
"So, you
didn't argue," KanPaar said. "You simply killed OreSeur.
And then you took his place, pretending to be him."
"That is what
we do," TenSoon said with frustration. "We take the place
of others, acting as spies. That is the entire point of the
Contract!"
"We do these
things to humans," snapped another Second. "This
is the first case where a kandra has been used to imitate another
kandra. It is a disturbing precedent you set."
It was
brilliant, TenSoon thought. I hate Zane for making me do it,
but I can still see the genius in it. Vin never even suspected me.
Who would?
"You should
have refused to do this act," KanPaar said. "You should
have pled the need for clarification of your Contract. If others were
to begin using us in this way, to kill one another, then we could be
wiped out in a matter of years!"
"You betrayed
us all with your rashness," said another.
Ah, TenSoon
thought. So that is their plan. They establish me as a traitor
first, so that what I say later lacks credibility . He smiled.
He was of the Third Generation; it was time he started acting like
it.
"I betrayed us
with my rashness?" TenSoon asked. "What of you, glorious
Seconds? Who was it who allowed a Contract to be assigned to Kelsier
himself? You gave a kandra servant to the very man who was
planning to kill the Father!"
KanPaar stiffened,
as if he'd been slapped, translucent face angry in the blue
lamplight. "It is not your place to make accusations, Third!"
"I have no
place anymore, it seems," TenSoon said. "None of us do, now
that the Father is dead. We have no right to complain, for we helped
it happen."
"How were we
to know this man would succeed when others hadn't," a Second
sputtered. "He paid so well that—"
KanPaar cut the
other off with a sharp wave of the hand. It wasn't good for those of
the Second Generation to defend themselves. However, HunFoor—the
kandra who had spoken—hadn't ever really fit in with the others
of his generation. He was a little more . . . dense.
"You shall
speak no more of this, Third," KanPaar said, pointing at
TenSoon.
"How can I
defend myself if I cannot—"
"You aren't
here to defend yourself," KanPaar said. "This is
not a trial—you have already admitted your guilt. This is a
judgment. Explain your actions, then let the First Generation
pronounce your fate!"
TenSoon fell
silent. It was not time to push. Not yet.
"Now,"
KanPaar said, "this thing you did in taking the place of one of
your own brothers is bad enough. Need we speak on, or would you
accept judgment now?"
"We both know
that OreSeur's death has little to do with why I am here,"
TenSoon said.
"Very well,"
said KanPaar. "Let us move on, then. Why don't you tell the
First Generation why—if you are such a Contract-abiding
kandra—you broke Contract with your master, disobeying
his interests and helping his enemy instead?"
KanPaar's
accusation echoed in the room. TenSoon closed his eyes, thinking back
to that day over a year ago. He remembered sitting quietly on the
floor of Keep Venture, watching as Zane and Vin fought.
No. It hadn't been
a fight. Zane had been burning atium, which had made him all but
invincible. Zane had played with Vin, toying with and mocking her.
Vin hadn't been
TenSoon's master—TenSoon had killed her kandra and taken his
place, spying on Vin at Zane's order. Zane. He had been
TenSoon's master. He had held TenSoon's Contract.
But against all of
his training, TenSoon had helped Vin. And, in doing so, he had
revealed to her the great Secret of the kandra. Their weakness: that
an Allomancer could use their powers to take complete control of a
kandra's body. The kandra served their Contracts to keep this Secret
hidden—they became servants, lest they end up as slaves.
TenSoon opened his eyes to the quiet chamber. This was the moment he
had been planning for.
"I didn't
break my Contract," he announced.
KanPaar snorted.
"You said otherwise when you came to us a year ago, Third."
"I told you
what happened," TenSoon said, standing tall. "What I said
was not a lie. I helped Vin instead of Zane. Partially because of my
actions, my master ended up dead at Vin's feet. But I did not break
my Contract."
"You imply
that Zane wanted you to help his enemy?" KanPaar said.
"No,"
TenSoon said. "I did not break my Contract because I decided to
serve a greater Contract. The First Contract!"
"The Father is
dead!" one of the Seconds snapped. "How could you serve our
Contract with him?"
"He is dead,"
TenSoon said. "That is true. But the First Contract did not die
with him! Vin, the Heir of the Survivor, was the one who killed the
Lord Ruler. She is our Mother now. Our First Contract is
with her!"
He had expected
outcries of blasphemy and condemnation. Instead, he got shocked
silence. KanPaar stood, stupefied, behind his stone lectern. The
members of the First Generation were silent, as usual, sitting in
their shadowed alcoves.
Well, TenSoon
thought, I suppose that means I should continue . "I
had to help the woman Vin," he said. "I could not
let Zane kill her, for I had a duty to her—a duty that began
the moment she took the Father's place."
KanPaar finally
found his voice. "She? Our Mother? She killed the Lord
Ruler!"
"And took his
place," TenSoon said. "She is one of us, in a way."
"Nonsense!"
KanPaar said. "I had expected rationalizations, TenSoon—perhaps
even lies. But these fantasies? These blasphemies?"
"Have you been
outside recently, KanPaar?" TenSoon asked. "Have you left
the Homeland in the last century at all? Do you understand what is
happening? The Father is dead. The land is in upheaval.
While returning to the Homeland a year ago, I saw the changes in the
mists. They no longer behave as they always have. We cannot continue
as we have. The Second Generation may not yet realize it, but Ruin
has come! Life will end. The time that the Worldbringers spoke
of—perhaps the time for the Resolution—is here!"
"You are
delusional, TenSoon. You've been amongst the humans too—"
"Tell them
what this is all really about, KanPaar," TenSoon interrupted,
voice rising. "Don't you want my real sin known? Don't
you want the others to hear?"
"Don't force
this, TenSoon," KanPaar said, pointing again. "What you've
done is bad enough. Don't make it—"
"I told her,"
TenSoon said, cutting him off again. "I told her our Secret.
At the end, she used me. Like the Allomancers of old. She took
control of my body, using the Flaw, and she made me fight against
Zane! This is what I've done. I've betrayed us all. She
knows—and I'm certain that she has told others. Soon they'll
all know how to control us. And, do you know why I did it?
Is it not the point of this judgment for me to speak of my purposes?"
He kept talking,
despite the fact that KanPaar tried to speak over him. "I did it
because she has the right to know our Secret," TenSoon
shouted. "She is the Mother! She inherited everything the Lord
Ruler had. Without her, we have nothing. We cannot create new
Blessings, or new kandra, on our own! The Trust is hers, now! We
should go to her. If this truly is the end of all things, then the
Resolution will soon come. She will—"
"Enough!"
KanPaar bellowed.
The chamber fell
silent again.
TenSoon stood,
breathing deeply. For a year, trapped in his pit, he'd planned how to
proclaim that information. His people had spent a thousand years, ten
generations, following the teachings of the First Contract. They
deserved to hear what had happened to him.
And yet, it felt so
. . . inadequate to just scream it out like some raving human. Would
any of his people really believe? Would he change anything at all?
"You have, by
your own admission, betrayed us," KanPaar said. "You've
broken Contract, you've murdered one of your own generation, and
you've told a human how to dominate us. You demanded judgment. Let it
come."
TenSoon turned
quietly, looking up toward the alcoves where the members of the First
Generation watched.
Perhaps . . .
perhaps they'll see that what I say is true. Perhaps my words will
shock them, and they'll realize that we need to offer service to Vin,
rather than just sit in these caves and wait while the world ends
around us .
But, nothing
happened. No motion, no sound. At times, TenSoon wondered if anyone
still lived up there. He hadn't spoken with a member of the First
Generation for centuries—they limited their communications
strictly to the Seconds.
If they did still
live, none of them took the opportunity to offer TenSoon clemency.
KanPaar smiled. "The First Generation has ignored your plea,
Third," he said. "Therefore, as their servants, we of the
Second Generation will offer judgment on their behalf. Your
sentencing will occur in one month's time."
TenSoon frowned. A
month? Why wait?
Either way, it was
over. He bowed his head, sighing. He'd had his say. The kandra now
knew that their Secret was out—the Seconds could no longer hide
that fact. Perhaps his words would inspire his people to action.
TenSoon would
probably never know.

Rashek moved
the Well of Ascension, obviously .
It was very
clever of him—perhaps the cleverest thing he did. He knew that
the power would one day return to the Well, for power such as
this—the fundamental power by which the world itself was
formed—does not simply run out. It can be used, and therefore
diffused, but it will always be renewed .
So, knowing
that rumors and tales would persist, Rashek changed the very
landscape of the world. He put mountains in what became the North,
and named that location Terris. Then he flattened his true homeland,
and built his capital there .
He constructed
his palace around that room at its heart, the room where he would
meditate, the room that was a replica of his old hovel in Terris. A
refuge created during the last moments before his power ran out .





12
"I'M
WORRIED ABOUT HIM, Elend," Vin said, sitting on their
bedroll.
"Who?"
Elend asked, looking away from the mirror. "Sazed?"
Vin nodded. When
Elend awoke from their nap, she was already up, bathed, and dressed.
He worried about her sometimes, working herself as hard as
she did. He worried even more now that he too was Mistborn, and
understood the limitations of pewter. The metal strengthened the
body, letting one postpone fatigue—but at a price. When the
pewter ran out or was turned off, the fatigue returned, crashing down
on you like a collapsing wall.
Yet Vin kept going.
Elend was burning pewter too, pushing himself, but she seemed to
sleep half as much as he did. She was harder than he was—strong
in ways he would never know.
"Sazed will
deal with his problems," Elend said, turning back to his
dressing. "He must have lost people before."
"This is
different," Vin said. He could see her in the reflection,
sitting cross-legged behind him in her simple clothing. Elend's stark
white uniform was just the opposite. It shone with its gold-painted
wooden buttons, intentionally crafted with too little metal in them
to be affected by Allomancy. The clothing itself had been made with a
special cloth that was easier to scrub clean of ash. Sometimes, he
felt guilty at all the work it took to make him look regal. Yet it
was necessary. Not for his vanity, but for his image. The image for
which his men marched to war. In a land of black, Elend wore
white—and became a symbol.
"Different?"
Elend asked, doing up the buttons on his jacket sleeves. "What
is different about Tindwyl's death? She fell during the assault on
Luthadel. So did Clubs and Dockson. You killed my own father in that
battle, and I beheaded my best friend shortly before it. We've all
lost people."
"He said
something like that himself," Vin said. "But, it's more
than just one death to him. I think he sees a kind of betrayal in
Tindwyl's death—he always was the only one of us who had faith.
He lost that when she died, somehow."
"The only one
of us who had faith?" Elend asked, plucking a wooden,
silver-painted pin off his desk and affixing it to his jacket. "What
about this?"
"You belong to
the Church of the Survivor, Elend," Vin said. "But you
don't have faith. Not like Sazed did. It was like . . . he knew
everything would turn out all right. He trusted that something was
watching over the world."
"He'll deal
with it."
"It's not just
him, Elend," Vin said. "Breeze tries too hard."
"What does
that mean?" Elend asked with amusement.
"He Pushes on
everyone's emotions," Vin said. "He Pushes too hard, trying
to make others happy, and he laughs too hard. He's afraid, worried.
He shows it by overcompensating."
Elend smiled.
"You're getting as bad as he is, reading everybody's emotions
and telling them how they're feeling."
"They're my
friends, Elend," Vin said. "I know them. And, I'm
telling you—they're giving up. One by one, they're beginning to
think we can't win this one."
Elend fastened the
final button, then looked at himself in the mirror. Sometimes, he
still wondered if he fit the ornate suit, with its crisp whiteness
and implied regality. He looked into his own eyes, looking past the
short beard, warrior's body, and scarred skin. He looked into those
eyes, searching for the king behind them. As always, he wasn't
completely impressed with what he saw.
He carried on
anyway, for he was the best they had. Tindwyl had taught him that.
"Very well," he said. "I trust that you're right about
the others—I'll do something to fix it."
That, after all,
was his job. The title of emperor carried with it only a single duty.
To make everything
better.
"All right,"
Elend said, pointing to a map of the empire hanging on the wall of
the conference tent. "We timed the arrival and disappearance of
the mists each day, then Noorden and his scribes analyzed them.
They've given us these perimeters as a guide."
The group leaned
in, studying the map. Vin sat at the back of the tent, as was still
her preference. Closer to the shadows. Closer to the exit. She'd
grown more confident, true—but that didn't make her careless.
She liked to be able to keep an eye on everyone in the room, even if
she did trust them.
And she did. Except
maybe Cett. The obstinate man sat at the front of the group, his
quiet teenage son at his side, as always. Cett—or, King
Cett, one of the monarchs who had sworn allegiance to Elend—had
an unfashionable beard, an even more unfashionable mouth, and two
legs that didn't work. That hadn't kept him from nearly conquering
Luthadel over a year before.
"Hell,"
Cett said. "You expect us to be able to read that thing?"
Elend tapped the
map with his finger. It was a rough sketch of the empire, similar to
the one they'd found in the cavern, only more up to date. It had
several large concentric circles inscribed on it.
"The outermost
circle is the place where the mists have completely taken the land,
and no longer leave at all during the daylight." Elend moved his
finger inward to another circle. "This circle passes through the
village we just visited, where we found the cache. This marks four
hours of daylight. Everything inside the circle gets more than four
hours. Everything outside of it gets less."
"And the final
circle?" Breeze asked. He sat with Allrianne as far away from
Cett as the tent would allow. Cett still had a habit of throwing
things at Breeze: insults, for the most part, and occasionally
knives.
Elend eyed the map.
"Assuming the mists keep creeping toward Luthadel at the same
rate, that circle represents the area that the scribes feel will get
enough sunlight this summer to support crops."
The room fell
silent.
Hope is for the
foolish, Reen's voice seemed to whisper in the back of Vin's
mind. She shook her head. Her brother, Reen, had trained her in the
ways of the street and the underground, teaching her to be
mistrustful and paranoid. In doing so, he'd also taught her to
survive. It had taken Kelsier to show her that it was possible to
both trust and survive—and it had been a hard lesson. Even so,
she still often heard Reen's phantom voice in the back of her
mind—more a memory than anything else—whispering her
insecurities, bringing back the brutal things he had taught her.
"That's a
fairly small circle, El," Ham said, still studying the map. The
large-muscled man sat with General Demoux between Cett and Breeze.
Sazed sat quietly to the side. Vin glanced at him, trying to judge if
their previous conversation had lifted his depression any, but she
couldn't tell.
They were a small
group: only nine, if one counted Cett's son, Gneorndin. But, it
included pretty much all that was left of Kelsier's crew. Only Spook,
doing reconnaissance in the North, was missing. Everyone was focused
on the map. The final circle was, indeed, very small—not even
as big as the Central Dominance, which held the imperial capital of
Luthadel. What the map said, and Elend implied, was that over ninety
percent of the empire wouldn't be able to support crops this summer.
"Even this
small bubble will be gone by next winter," Elend said.
Vin watched the
others contemplate, and realize—if they hadn't already—the
horror of what was upon them. It's like Alendi's logbook said,
she thought. They couldn't fight the Deepness with armies. It
destroyed cities, bringing a slow, terrible death. They were
helpless.
The Deepness. That
was what they'd called the mists—or, at least, that was what
the surviving records called them. Perhaps the thing they fought, the
primal force Vin had released, was behind the obfuscation. There was
really no way of knowing for sure what had once been, for the entity
had the power to change records.
"All right,
people," Elend said, folding his arms. "We need options.
Kelsier recruited you because you could do the impossible. Well, our
predicament is pretty impossible."
"He didn't
recruit me," Cett pointed out. "I got pulled by my balls
into this little fiasco."
"I wish I
cared enough to apologize," Elend said, staring at them. "Come
on. I know you have thoughts."
"Well, my dear
man," Breeze said, "the most obvious option appears to be
the Well of Ascension. It seems the power there was built to fight
the mists."
"Or to free
the thing hiding in them," Cett said.
"That doesn't
matter," Vin said, causing heads to turn. "There's no power
at the Well. It's gone. Used up. If it ever returns, it will be in
another thousand years, I suspect."
"That's a
little bit long to stretch the supplies in those storage caches,"
Elend said.
"What if we
grew plants that need very little light?" Ham asked. As always,
he wore simple trousers and a vest. He was a Thug, and could burn
pewter—which made him resistant to heat and cold. He'd
cheerfully walk around sleeveless on a day that would send most men
running for shelter.
Well, maybe not
cheerfully. Ham hadn't changed overnight, as Sazed had. Ham, however,
had lost some of his joviality. He tended to sit around a
lot, looks of consternation on his face, as if he were considering
things very, very carefully—and not much liking the answers he
came up with.
"There are
plants that don't need light?" Allrianne asked, cocking her
head.
"Mushrooms and
the like," Ham said.
"I doubt we
could feed an entire empire on mushrooms," Elend said. "Though
it's a good thought."
"There have to
be other plants, too," Ham said. "Even if the mists come
all day, there will be some light that gets through. Some plants have
to be able to live on that."
"Plants we
can't eat, my dear man," Breeze pointed out.
"Yes, but
maybe animals can," Ham said.
Elend nodded
thoughtfully.
"Blasted
little time left for horticulture," Cett noted. "We should
have been working on this sort of thing years ago."
"We didn't
know most of this until a few months ago," Ham said.
"True,"
Elend said. "But the Lord Ruler had a thousand years to prepare.
That's why he made the storage caverns—and we still don't know
what the last one contains."
"I don't like
relying on the Lord Ruler, Elend," Breeze said with a shake of
his head. "He must have prepared those caches knowing that he'd
be dead if anyone ever had to use them."
Cett nodded. "The
idiot Soother has a point. If I were the Lord Ruler, I'd have stuffed
those caches with poisoned food and pissed-in water. If I were dead,
then everyone else ought to be as well."
"Fortunately,
Cett," Elend said with a raised eyebrow, "the Lord Ruler
has proven more altruistic than we might have expected."
"Not something
I ever thought I'd hear," Ham noted.
"He was
emperor," Elend said. "We may not have liked his rule, but
I can understand him somewhat. He wasn't spiteful—he wasn't
even evil, exactly. He just . . . got carried away. Besides, he
resisted this thing that we're fighting."
"This thing?"
Cett asked. "The mists?"
"No,"
Elend said. "The thing that was trapped in the Well of
Ascension."
It is called
Ruin, Vin thought suddenly. It will destroy everything .
"This is why
I've decided we need to secure that last cache," Elend said.
"The Lord Ruler lived through this once—he knew how to
prepare. Perhaps we'll find plants that can grow without sunlight.
Each of the caches so far has had repeats—food stores,
water—but each one has held something new as well. In Vetitan,
we found large stores of the first eight Allomantic metals. The thing
in that last cache might be just what we need in order to survive."
"That's it,
then!" Cett said, smiling broadly through his beard. "We
are marching on Fadrex, aren't we?"
Elend nodded
curtly. "Yes. The main force of the army will march for the
Western Dominance once we break camp here."
"Ha!"
Cett said. "Penrod and Janarle can suck on that for a
few days."
Vin smiled faintly.
Penrod and Janarle were the two other most important kings under
Elend's imperial rule. Penrod governed Luthadel, which was why he
wasn't with them currently, and Janarle ruled the Northern
Dominance—the kingdom that included House Venture's hereditary
lands.
The largest city in
the north, however, had been seized in a revolt while Janarle—with
Elend's father, Straff Venture—had been away laying siege to
Luthadel. So far, Elend hadn't been able to spare the troops
necessary to take Urteau back from its dissidents, so Janarle ruled
in exile, his smaller force of troops used to maintain order in the
cities he did control.
Both Janarle and
Penrod had made a point of finding reasons to keep the main army from
marching on Cett's homeland.
"Those
bastards won't be at all happy when they hear about this," Cett
said.
Elend shook his
head. "Does everything you say have to contain one vulgarity or
another?"
Cett shrugged.
"What's the point of speaking if you can't say something
interesting?"
"Swearing
isn't interesting," Elend said.
"That's your
own damned opinion," Cett said, smiling. "And, you really
shouldn't be complaining, Emperor. If you think the things I
say are vulgar, you've been living in Luthadel far too long. Where I
come from, people are embarrassed to use pretty words like 'damn.' "
Elend sighed.
"Anyway, I—"
He was cut off as
the ground began to shake. Vin was on her feet in seconds, looking
for danger as the others cursed and reached for stability. She threw
back the tent flap, peering through the mists. Yet, the shaking
subsided quickly, and it caused very little chaos in the camp, all
things considered. Patrols moved about, checking for
problems—officers and Allomancers under Elend's command. Most
of the soldiers, however, just remained in their tents.
Vin turned back
toward the tent's room. A few of the chairs had fallen over, travel
furniture disturbed by the earthquake. The others slowly returned to
their seats. "Sure have been a lot of those lately," Ham
said. Vin met Elend's eyes, and could see concern in them.
We can fight
armies, we can capture cities, but what of ash, mists, and
earthquakes? What about the world falling apart around us?
"Anyway,"
Elend said, voice firm despite the concerns Vin knew he must feel,
"Fadrex has to be our next goal. We can't risk missing the
cache, and the things it might contain."
Like the atium,
Reen whispered in Vin's head as she sat back down. "Atium,"
she said out loud.
Cett perked up.
"You think it'll be there?"
"There are
theories," Elend said, eyeing Vin. "But we have no proof."
"It will be
there," she said. It has to be. I don't know why, but we
have to have it.
"I hope it
isn't," Cett said. "I marched halfway across the blasted
empire to try and steal that atium—if it turns out I left it
beneath my own city . . ."
"I think we're
missing something important, El," Ham said. "Are you
talking about conquering Fadrex City?"
The room fell
still. Up until this point, Elend's armies had been used defensively,
attacking koloss garrisons or the camps of small warlords and
bandits. They had bullied a few cities into joining with him, but
they had never actually assaulted a city and taken it by force.
Elend turned,
looking back toward the map. Even from the side, Vin could see his
eyes—the eyes of a man hardened by two years of near-perpetual
war.
"Our primary
goal will be to take the city by diplomacy," Elend said.
"Diplomacy?"
Cett said. "Fadrex is mine. That damn obligator stole
it from me! There's no need to worry your conscience about attacking
him, Elend."
"No need?"
Elend asked, turning. "Cett, those are your people—your
soldiers—we'd have to kill to get into that city."
"People die in
war," Cett said. "Feeling bad about it doesn't remove the
blood from your hands, so why bother? Those soldiers turned against
me; they deserve what they'll get."
"It's not that
simple," Ham said. "If there was no way for the soldiers to
fight this usurper, then why expect them to give up their lives?"
"Especially
for a man who was, himself, a usurper," Elend said.
"Either way,"
Ham said, "reports describe that city as being very well
defended. It will be a tough stone to break, El."
Elend stood quietly
for a moment, then eyed Cett, who still looked inordinately pleased
with himself. The two seemed to share something—an
understanding. Elend was a master of theory, and had probably read as
much on war as anyone. Cett seemed to have a sixth sense for warfare
and tactics, and had replaced Clubs as the empire's prime military
strategist.
"Siege,"
Cett said.
Elend nodded. "If
King Yomen won't respond to diplomacy, then the only way we'll get in
that city—short of killing half our men breaking in—is by
besieging it and making him desperate."
"Do we have
time for that?" Ham asked, frowning.
"Besides
Urteau," Elend said, "Fadrex City and the surrounding areas
are the only major sections of the Inner Dominances that maintain a
strong enough force to be threatening. That, plus the cache, means we
can't afford to simply leave them alone."
"Time is on
our side, in a way," Cett said, scratching his beard. "You
don't just attack a city like Fadrex, Ham. It has fortifications, one
of the few cities besides Luthadel that could repel an army. But,
since it's outside of the Central Dominance, it's probably already
hurting for food."
Elend nodded.
"While we have all of the supplies we found in the storage
caches. If we block off the highway, then hold the canal, they'll
have to surrender the city eventually. Even if they've found
the cache—which I doubt—we will be able to outlast them."
Ham frowned. "I
guess. . . ."
"Besides,"
Elend added, "if things get tough, we do have about twenty
thousand koloss we can draw upon."
Ham raised an
eyebrow, though said nothing. The implication was clear. You'd
turn koloss against other people?
"There is
another element to this," Sazed said softly. "Something we
have, as of yet, not discussed." Several people turned, as if
they'd forgotten he was there.
"The mists,"
Sazed said. "Fadrex City lies well beyond the mist perimeter,
Emperor Venture. Will you subject your army to fifteen percent
casualties before you even arrive at the city?"
Elend fell quiet.
So far, he'd managed to keep most of his soldiers out of the mists.
It seemed wrong to Vin that their army had been protected from the
sickness, while the villagers had been forced to go out in the mists.
And yet, where they camped, there was still a significant amount of
mistless daylight, and they also had enough tents to hold all of the
soldiers, something they'd lacked when moving the villagers.
Mists rarely went
into buildings, even cloth ones. There had been no reason to risk
killing some of the soldiers, since they'd been able to avoid it. It
seemed hypocritical to Vin, but so far, it still made sense.
Elend met Sazed's
eyes. "You make a good point," he said. "We can't
protect the soldiers from this forever. I forced the villagers of
Vetitan to immunize themselves; I suspect that I will have to make
the army do the same, for the same reasons."
Vin sat back
quietly. She often wished for the days when she'd had nothing to do
with such decisions—or, better yet, when Elend hadn't been
forced to make them.
"We march for
Fadrex," Elend said again, turning from the group. He pointed at
the map. "If we're going to pull through this—and by 'we,'
I mean all the people of the New Empire—we're going to need to
band together and concentrate our populations near the Central
Dominance. It will be the only place that can grow food this summer,
and we'll need every bit of manpower we can muster to clear ash and
prepare the fields. That means bringing the people of Fadrex under
our protection.
"That also
means," he said, pointing toward the northeastern section of the
map, "that we'll need to suppress the rebellion in Urteau. Not
only does the city there contain a storage cache—with grain we
desperately need for a second planting down in the Central
Dominance—but the city's new rulers are gathering strength and
an army. Urteau is well within staging distance of Luthadel, as we
discovered back when my father marched on us. I will not
have a repeat of that event."
"We don't have
enough troops to march on both fronts at once, El," Ham said.
Elend nodded. "I
know. In fact, I'd rather avoid marching on Urteau. That was my
father's seat—the people there had good reason to rebel against
him. Demoux, report?"
Demoux stood. "We
had a steel-inscribed message from Spook while Your Majesty was
away," he said. "The lad says that the faction controlling
Urteau is made up of skaa rebels."
"That sounds
promising," Breeze noted. "Our kind of people."
"They're . . .
quite harsh with noblemen, Lord Breeze," Demoux said. "And
they include anyone with noble parents in that group."
"A little
extreme, I'd think," Ham said.
"A lot of
people thought Kelsier was extreme too," Breeze said. "I'm
certain we can talk reason into these rebels."
"Good,"
Elend said, "because I'm counting on you and Sazed to bring
Urteau under our control without the use of force. There are only
five of these caches, and we can't afford to lose one. Who knows what
we'll eventually discover in Fadrex—it might require us to
return to the other caches to find something we missed." He
turned, looking at Breeze, then Sazed.
"We can't just
sneak the food out of Urteau," he said. "If the rebellion
in that city spreads, it could cause the entire empire to fracture
back into splinters. We have to bring the men there to our
side."
The members of the
room nodded, as did Vin. They knew from personal experience how much
power a small rebellion could exert on an empire.
"The Fadrex
siege could take some time," Elend said. "Long before
summer arrives, I want you to have secured that northern cache and
subdued the rebellion. Send the seed stock down to the Central
Dominance for planting."
"Don't worry,"
Breeze said. "I've seen the kinds of governments skaa set up—by
the time we get there, the city will probably be on the edge of
collapse anyway. Why, they'll likely be relieved to get an offer to
join the New Empire!"
"Be wary,"
Elend said. "Spook's reports have been sparse, but it sounds as
if tensions in the city are extreme. We'll send a few hundred
soldiers with you as protection." He looked back at the map,
eyes narrowing slightly. "Five caches, five cities. Urteau is
part of this all, somehow. We can't afford to let it slip away."
"Your
Majesty," Sazed said. "Is my presence required on that
trip?"
Elend frowned,
glancing back at Sazed. "You have something else you need to be
doing, Sazed?"
"I have
research I would do," the Keeper said.
"I respect
your wishes, as always," Elend said. "If you think this
research is important . . ."
"It's of a
personal nature, Your Majesty," Sazed said.
"Could you do
it while helping in Urteau?" Elend asked. "You're a
Terrisman, which lends you a credibility none of us can claim. Beyond
that, people respect and trust you, Sazed—with good reason.
Breeze, on the other hand, has something of a . . . reputation."
"I worked hard
for it, you know," Breeze said.
"I'd really
like to have you lead that team, Sazed," Elend said. "I
can't think of a better ambassador than the Holy Witness himself."
Sazed's expression
was unreadable. "Very well," he finally said. "I shall
do my best."
"Good,"
Elend said, turning to regard the rest of the group. "Then
there's one last thing I need to ask of you all."
"And what is
that?" Cett asked.
Elend stood for a
few moments, looking over their heads, appearing thoughtful. "I
want you to tell me about the Survivor," he finally said.
"He was lord
of the mists," Demoux said immediately.
"Not the
rhetoric," Elend said. "Someone tell me about the man,
Kelsier. I never met him, you know. I saw him once, right before he
died, but I never knew him."
"What's the
point?" Cett asked. "We've all heard the stories. He's
practically a god, if you listen to the skaa."
"Just do as I
ask," Elend said.
The tent was still
for a few moments. Finally, Ham spoke. "Kell was . . . grand. He
wasn't just a man, he was bigger than that. Everything he did was
large—his dreams, the way he spoke, the way he thought. . . ."
"And it wasn't
false," Breeze added. "I can tell when a man is being a
fake. That's why I started my first job with Kelsier, actually.
Amidst all the pretenders and posturers, he was genuine. Everyone
wanted to be the best. Kelsier really was."
"He was a
man," Vin said quietly. "Just a man. Yet, you always knew
he'd succeed. He made you be what he wanted you to be."
"So he could
use you," Breeze said.
"But you were
better when he was done with you," Ham added.
Elend nodded
slowly. "I wish I could have known him. Early in my career, I
always compared myself to him. By the time I heard of Kelsier, he was
already becoming a legend. It was unfair to force myself to try and
be him, but I worried regardless. Anyway, those of you who knew him,
maybe you can answer another question for me. What do you think he'd
say, if he saw us now?"
"He'd be
proud," Ham said immediately. "I mean, we defeated the Lord
Ruler, and we built a skaa government."
"What if he
saw us at this conference?" Elend said.
The tent fell still
again. When someone spoke what they were all thinking, it came from a
source Vin hadn't expected.
"He'd tell us
to laugh more," Sazed whispered.
Breeze chuckled.
"He was completely insane, you know. The worse things got, the
more he'd joke. I remember how chipper he was the very day after one
of our worst defeats, when we lost most of our skaa army to that fool
Yeden. Kell walked in, a spring in his step, making one of his inane
jokes."
"Sounds
insensitive," Allrianne said.
Ham shook his head.
"No. He was just determined. He always said that laughter was
something the Lord Ruler couldn't take from him. He planned and
executed the overthrow of a thousand-year empire—and he did it
as a kind of . . . penance for letting his wife die thinking that he
hated her. But, he did it all with a smirk on his lips. Like every
joke was his way of slapping fate in the face."
"We need what
he had," Elend said.
The room's eyes
turned back toward him.
"We can't keep
doing this," Elend said. "We bicker amongst ourselves, we
mope about, watching the ash fall, convinced that we're doomed."
Breeze chuckled. "I
don't know if you noticed the earthquake a few minutes ago, my dear
man, but the world appears to be ending. That is an indisputably
depressing event."
Elend shook his
head. "We can survive this. But, the only way that will happen
is if our people don't give up. They need leaders who laugh, leaders
who feel that this fight can be won. So, this is what I ask
of you. I don't care if you're an optimist or a pessimist—I
don't care if secretly, you think we'll all be dead before the month
ends. On the outside, I want to see you smiling. Do it in defiance,
if you have to. If the end does come, I want this group to meet that
end smiling. As the Survivor taught us."
Slowly, the members
of the former crew nodded—even Sazed, though his face seemed
troubled.
Cett just shook his
head. "You people are all insane. How I ended up with you, I'll
never know."
Breeze laughed.
"Now, that's a lie, Cett. You know exactly how you
ended up joining with us. We threatened to kill you if you didn't!"
Elend was looking
at Vin. She met his eyes, and nodded. It had been a good speech. She
wasn't certain if his words would change anything—the crew
could never again be the way it had been at the beginning, laughing
freely around Clubs's table in the evening hours. However, maybe if
they kept Kelsier's smile in mind, they'd be less likely to forget
just why it was they kept struggling on.
"All right,
people," Elend finally said. "Let's start preparations.
Breeze, Sazed, Allrianne—I'll need you to talk with the scribes
about supply estimates for your trip. Ham, send word to Luthadel and
tell Penrod to have our scholars work on culturing plants that can
grow in very little sunlight. Demoux, pass the word to the men. We
march tomorrow."

Hemalurgy, it
is called, because of the connection to blood. It is not a
coincidence, I believe, that death is always involved in the transfer
of powers via Hemalurgy. Marsh once described it as a "messy"
process. Not the adjective I would have chosen. It's not disturbing
enough.





13
I'M MISSING
SOMETHING, MARSH THOUGHT.
He sat in the
koloss camp. Just sitting. He hadn't moved in hours. Ash dusted him
like a statue. Ruin's attention had been focused elsewhere lately,
and Marsh had been left with more and more time to himself.
He still didn't
struggle. Struggle just brought Ruin's attention.
Isn't that what
I want? he thought. To be controlled? When Ruin forced
him to see things its way, the dying world seemed wonderful. That
bliss was far superior to the dread he felt while sitting on the
stump, slowly being buried in ash.
No. No, that's
not what I want ! It was bliss, true, but it was false. As he
had once struggled against Ruin, he now struggled against his own
sense of inevitability.
What am I
missing? he thought again, distracting himself. The koloss
army—three hundred thousand strong—hadn't moved in weeks.
Its members were slowly, yet relentlessly, killing each other. It
seemed a waste of resources to let the army stagnate, even if the
creatures could apparently eat even the dead plants beneath the ash
to survive.
They can't
possibly live on that for long, can they? He didn't know much
about the koloss, despite spending the better part of a year with
them. They appeared to be able to eat almost anything, as if just
filling their stomachs were more important than actual nutrition.
What was Ruin
waiting for? Why not take his army in and attack? Marsh was familiar
enough with Final Empire geography to recognize that he was stationed
in the North, near Terris. Why not move down and strike Luthadel?
There were no other
Inquisitors in the camp. Ruin had called them to other tasks, leaving
Marsh alone. Of all the Inquisitors, Marsh had been given the largest
number of new spikes—he had ten new ones planted at various
places in his body. That ostensibly made him the most powerful of the
Inquisitors. Why leave him behind?
Yet . . . what
does it matter? he wondered. The end has come. There is no
way to beat Ruin. The world will end.
He felt guilty for
the thought. If he could have turned his eyes downward in shame, he
would have. There had been a time when he'd run the entire skaa
rebellion. Thousands had looked to him for leadership. And then . . .
Kelsier had been captured. As had Mare, the woman both Kelsier and
Marsh had loved.
When Kelsier and
Mare had been cast into the Pits of Hathsin, Marsh had left the
rebellion. His rationale had been simple. If the Lord Ruler could
catch Kelsier—the most brilliant thief of his time—then
he would catch Marsh eventually too. It hadn't been fear that had
driven Marsh's retirement, but simple realism. Marsh had always been
practical. Fighting had proven useless. So why do it?
And then Kelsier
had returned and done what a thousand years of rebellious skaa hadn't
been able to: He'd overthrown the empire, facilitating the death of
the Lord Ruler himself.
That should
have been me, Marsh thought. I served the rebellion all my
life, then gave up just before they finally won.
It was a tragedy,
and it was made worse by the fact that Marsh was doing it again. He
was giving up.
Damn you,
Kelsier! he thought with frustration. Can't you leave me be
even in death?
And yet, one
harrowing, undeniable fact remained. Mare had been right. She had
chosen Kelsier over Marsh. And then, when both men had been forced to
deal with her death, one had given up.
The other had made
her dreams come true.
Marsh knew why
Kelsier had decided to overthrow the Final Empire. It hadn't been for
the money, the fame, or even—as most suspected—for
revenge. Kelsier knew Mare's heart. He'd known that she dreamed of
days when plants flourished and the sky was not red. She'd always
carried with her that little picture of a flower, a copied copy of a
copy—a depiction of something that had been lost to the Final
Empire long ago.
But, Marsh
thought bitterly, you didn't make her dreams a reality, Kelsier.
You failed. You killed the Lord Ruler, but that didn't fix anything.
It made things worse!
The ash continued
to fall, blowing around Marsh in a lazy breeze. Koloss grunted, and
in the near distance one screamed as his companion killed him.
Kelsier was dead
now. But, he had died for her dream. Mare had been right to pick him,
but she was dead too. Marsh wasn't. Not yet. I can fight still,
he told himself. But how? Even moving his finger would draw
Ruin's attention.
Although, during
the last few weeks, he hadn't struggled at all. Perhaps that was why
Ruin decided it could leave Marsh alone for so long. The creature—or
the force, or whatever it was—wasn't omnipotent. Marsh
suspected, however, that it could move about freely, watching the
world and seeing what was happening in various parts of it. No walls
could block its view—it seemed to be able to watch anything.
Except a man's
mind.
Perhaps . . .
perhaps if I stop struggling long enough, I'll be able to surprise it
when I finally do decide to strike.
It seemed as good a
plan as any. And, Marsh knew exactly what he would do, when the time
came. He'd remove Ruin's most useful tool. He'd pull the spike from
his back and kill himself. Not out of frustration, and not out of
despair. He knew that he had some important part to play in Ruin's
plans. If he removed himself at the right time, it could give the
others the chance they needed.
It was all he could
give. Yet, it seemed fitting, and his new confidence made him wish he
could stand and face the world with pride. Kelsier had killed himself
to secure freedom for the skaa. Marsh would do the same—and in
doing so, hope to help save the world itself from destruction.






PART TWO
CLOTH AND GLASS
Ruin's
consciousness was trapped by the Well of Ascension, kept mostly
impotent. That night, when we discovered the Well for the first time,
we found something we didn't understand. A black smoke, clogging one
of the rooms.
Though we
discussed it after the fact, we couldn't decide what that was. How
could we possibly have known?
The body of a
god—or, rather, the power of a god, since the two are really
the same thing. Ruin and Preservation inhabited power and energy in
the same way a person inhabits flesh and blood.





14
SPOOK
FLARED TIN.
He let it burn
within him—burn brightly, burn powerfully. He never turned it
off anymore. He just left it on, letting it roar, a fire within him.
Tin was one of the slowest-burning of metals, and it wasn't difficult
to obtain in the amounts necessary for Allomancy.
He moved down the
silent street. Even with Kelsier's now-famous proclamations that the
skaa need not fear the mists, few people went out at night. For, at
night, the mists came. Deep and mysterious, dark and omnipresent, the
mists were one of the great constants of the Final Empire. They came
every night. Thicker than a simple fog, they swirled in definite
patterns—almost as if the different banks, streams, and fronts
of mist were living things. Almost playful, yet enigmatic.
To Spook, however,
they were barely an obstruction anymore. He'd always been told not to
flare his tin too much; he'd been warned not to become dependent upon
it. It would do dangerous things to his body, people said. And, the
truth was, they were right. He had flared his tin nonstop for a year
straight—never letting up, keeping his body in a constant state
of super-heightened senses—and it had changed him. He
worried that the changes would, indeed, be dangerous.
But he needed them,
for the people of Urteau needed him.
Stars blazed in the
sky above him like a million tiny suns. They shone through the mists,
which had—during the last year—become diaphanous and
weak. At first, Spook had thought the world itself was changing. Then
he had realized that it was just his perception. Somehow, by flaring
tin for so long, he had permanently enhanced his senses to a point
far beyond what other Allomancers could attain.
He'd almost
stopped. The flared tin had begun as a reaction to Clubs's death. He
still felt terrible about the way he'd escaped Luthadel, leaving his
uncle to die. During those first few weeks, Spook had flared his
metals as almost a penance—he'd wanted to feel
everything around him, take it all in, even though it was painful.
Perhaps because it was painful.
But then he'd
started to change, and that had worried him. But, the crew always
talked about how hard Vin pushed herself. She rarely slept, using
pewter to keep herself awake and alert. Spook didn't know how that
worked—he was no Mistborn, and could only burn one metal—but
he figured that if burning his one metal could give him an advantage,
he'd better take it. Because they were going to need every advantage
they could get.
The starlight was
like daylight to him. During the actual day, he had to wear a cloth
tied across his eyes to protect them, and even then going outside was
sometimes blinding. His skin had become so sensitive that each pebble
in the ground—each crack, each flake of stone—felt like a
knife jabbing him through the soles of his shoes. The chill spring
air seemed freezing, and he wore a thick cloak.
However, he had
concluded that these nuisances were small prices to pay for the
opportunity to become . . . whatever it was he had become. As he
moved down the street, he could hear people shuffling and turning in
their beds, even through their walls. He could sense a footstep from
yards away. He could see on a dark night as no other human ever had.
Perhaps he'd find a
way to become useful to the others. Always before, he'd been the
least important member of the crew. The dismissible boy who ran
errands or kept watch while the others made plans. He didn't resent
them for that—they'd been right to give him such simple duties.
Because of his street dialect, he'd been difficult to understand, and
while all the other members of the crew had been hand-picked by
Kelsier, Spook had joined by default since he was Clubs's nephew.
Spook sighed,
shoving his hands in his trouser pockets as he walked down the
too-bright street. He could feel each and every thread in the fabric.
Dangerous things
were happening, he knew that: the way the mists lingered during the
day, the way the ground shook as if it were a sleeping man,
periodically suffering a terrible dream. Spook worried he wouldn't be
of much help in the critical days to come. A little over a year
before, his uncle had died after Spook fled the city. Spook had run
out of fear, but also out of a knowledge of his own impotence. He
wouldn't have been able to help during the siege.
He didn't want to
be in that position again. He wanted to be able to help, somehow. He
wouldn't run into the woods, hiding while the world ended around him.
Elend and Vin had sent him to Urteau to gather as much information as
he could about the Citizen and his government there, and so Spook
intended to do his best. If that meant pushing his body beyond what
was safe, so be it.
He approached a
large intersection. He looked both ways down the intersecting
streets—the view clear as day to his eyes. I may not be
Mistborn, and I may not be emperor, he thought. But I'm
something. Something new. Something Kelsier would be proud of.
Maybe this time
I can help.
He saw no motion in
either direction, so he slipped onto the street and moved to the
north. It felt strange, sometimes, slinking quietly along a street
that seemed brightly lit. Yet, he knew that to others it would be
dark, with only starlight to see by, the mist blocking and obscuring
as ever. Tin helped an Allomancer pierce the mists, and Spook's
increasingly sensitive eyes were even better at this. He brushed
through the mists, barely noticing them.
He heard the patrol
long before he saw it. How could someone not hear that
clanking of armor, not feel that clatter of feet on the cobblestones?
He froze, standing with his back to the earthen wall bordering the
street, watching for the patrol.
They bore a
torch—to Spook's enhanced eyes, it looked like a blazing beacon
of near-blinding brilliance. The torch marked them as fools. Its
light wouldn't help—just the reverse. The light reflected off
the mists, enveloping the guards in a little bubble of light that
ruined their night vision.
Spook stayed where
he was, motionless. The patrol clanked forward, moving down the
street. They passed within a few feet of him, but didn't notice him
standing there. There was something . . . invigorating about being
able to watch, feeling at once completely exposed and perfectly
unseen. It made him wonder why the new Urteau government even
bothered with patrols. Of course, the government's skaa officials
would have very little experience with the mists.
As the guard patrol
disappeared around a corner—bearing their glaring torch with
them—Spook turned back to his task. The Citizen would be
meeting with his aides this night, if his schedule held. Spook
intended to listen in on that conversation. He moved carefully down
the street.
No city could
compare with Luthadel in sheer size, but Urteau made a respectable
effort. As the hereditary home of the Venture line, it had once been
a much more important—and well-maintained—city than it
was now. That decline had begun even before the death of the Lord
Ruler. The most obvious sign of that was the roadway Spook now walked
on. Once, the city had been crisscrossed with canals that had
functioned as watery streets. Those canals had gone dry some time
ago, leaving the city crossed by deep, dusty troughs that grew muddy
when it rained. Rather than filling them in, the people had simply
begun to use the empty bottoms as roads.
The street Spook
now used had once been a wide waterway capable of accommodating even
large barges. Ten-foot-high walls rose on either side of the sunken
street, and buildings loomed above, built up against the lip of the
canal. Nobody had been able to give Spook a definite, or consistent,
answer as to why the canals had emptied—some blamed
earthquakes, others blamed droughts. The fact remained, however, that
in the hundred years since the canals had lost their water, nobody
had found an economical way to refill them.
And so, Spook
continued down the "street," feeling like he was walking in
a deep slot. Numerous ladders—and the occasional ramp or flight
of stairs—led up to the sidewalks and the buildings above, but
few people ever walked up there. The streetslots—as the city's
residents called them—had simply become normal.
Spook caught a
scent of smoke as he walked. He glanced up, and noted a gap in the
horizon of buildings. Recently, a building on this street had been
burned to the ground. The house of a nobleman. His sense of smell,
like his other senses, was incredibly sensitive. So it was possible
that he was smelling smoke from long ago, when buildings had burned
during the initial rampages following Straff Venture's death. And
yet, the scent seemed too strong for that. Too recent.
Spook hurried on.
Urteau was dying slowly, decaying, and a lot of the blame could be
placed on its ruler, the Citizen. Long ago, Elend had given a speech
to the people of Luthadel. It had been the night when the Lord Ruler
had died, the night of Kelsier's rebellion. Spook remembered Elend's
words well, for the man had spoken of hatred, rebellion, and the
dangers associated with them. He'd warned that if the people founded
their new government on hatred and bloodshed, it would consume itself
with fear, jealousy, and chaos.
Spook had been in
that audience, listening. He now saw that Elend was right. The skaa
of Urteau had overthrown their noble rulers, and—in a way—Spook
was proud of them for doing so. He felt a growing fondness for the
city, partially because of how devoutly they tried to follow what the
Survivor had taught. Yet, their rebellion hadn't stopped with the
ousting of the nobility. As Elend had predicted, the city had become
a place of fear and death.
The question was
not why it had happened, but how to stop it.
For now, that
wasn't Spook's job. He was just supposed to gather information. Only
familiarity—gained during weeks spent investigating the
city—let him know when he was getting close, for it was
frustratingly difficult to keep track of where one was down in the
streetslots. At first, he had tried to stay out of them, slipping
through smaller alleyways above. Unfortunately, the slots networked
the entire city, and he'd wasted so much time going up and down that
he'd eventually realized that the slots really were the only viable
way of getting around.
Unless one were
Mistborn, of course. Unfortunately, Spook couldn't hop from building
to building on lines of Allomantic power. He was stuck in the slots.
He made the best of it.
He picked a ladder
and swung onto it, climbing up. Though he wore leather gloves, he
could feel the grain of the wood. Up top, there was a small sidewalk
running along the streetslot. An alleyway extended ahead of him,
leading into a cluster of houses. A building at the end of the small
street was his goal, but he did not move toward it. Instead, he
waited quietly, searching for the signs he knew were there. Sure
enough, he caught a rustling motion in a window a few buildings down.
His ears caught the sound of footsteps in another building. The
street ahead of him was being watched.
Spook turned aside.
While the sentries were very careful to watch the alleyway, they
unintentionally left another avenue open: their own buildings. Spook
crept to the right, moving on feet that could feel each pebble
beneath them, listening with ears that could hear a man's increased
breathing as he spotted something unusual. He rounded the outside of
a building, turning away from the watchful eyes, and entering a
dead-end alleyway on the other side. There, he lay a hand against the
wall of the building.
There were
vibrations inside the room; it was occupied, so he moved on. The next
room alerted him immediately, as he heard whispered voices inside.
The third room, however, gave him nothing. No vibrations of motion.
No whispers. Not even the muted thudding of a heartbeat—something
he could sometimes hear, if the air were still enough. Taking a deep
breath, Spook quietly worked open the window lock and slipped inside.
It was a sleeping
chamber, empty as he'd anticipated. He'd never come through this
particular room before. His heart thumped as he closed the shutters,
then slipped across the floor. Despite the near-total darkness, he
had no trouble seeing in the room. It barely seemed dim to him.
Outside the room,
he found a more familiar hallway. He easily snuck past two guard
rooms, where men watched the street outside. There was a thrill in
doing these infiltrations. Spook was in one of the Citizen's own
guardhouses, steps away from large numbers of armed soldiers. They
should have taken care to guard their own building better.
He crept up the
stairs, making his way to a small, rarely used room on the third
floor. He checked for vibrations, then slipped inside. The austere
chamber was piled with a mound of extra bedrolls and a dusty stack of
uniforms. Spook smiled as he moved across the floor, stepping
carefully and quietly, his highly sensitive toes able to feel loose,
squeaky, or warped boards. He sat down on the windowsill itself,
confident that nobody outside would be able to see well enough to
spot him.
The Citizen's house
lay a few yards away. Quellion decried ostentation, and had chosen
for his headquarters a structure of modest size. It had probably once
been a minor nobleman's home, and had only a small yard, which Spook
could easily see into from his vantage. The building itself glowed,
light streaking from every crack and window. It was as if the
building were filled with some awesome power, and on the verge of
bursting.
But, then, that was
just the way that Spook's overflared tin made him see any building
that had lights on inside.
Spook leaned back,
legs up on the windowsill, back against the frame. The window
contained neither glass nor shutters, though there were nail holes on
the side of the wood, indicating that there had once been something
there. The reason the shutters had been removed didn't matter to
Spook—the lack of them meant that this room was unlikely to be
entered at night. Mists had already claimed the room, though they
were so faint to Spook's eyes that he had had trouble seeing them.
For a while,
nothing happened. The building and grounds below remained silent and
still in the night air. Eventually, however, she appeared.
Spook perked up,
watching the young woman leave the house and enter the garden. She
had on a light brown skaa's dress—a garment she somehow wore
with striking elegance. Her hair was darker than the dress, but not
by much. Spook had seen very few people with her shade of deep auburn
hair—at least, few people who had been able to keep it clean of
ash and soot.
Everyone in the
city knew of Beldre, the Citizen's sister, though few had ever seen
her. She was said to be beautiful—and in this case, the rumors
were true. However, nobody had ever mentioned her sadness. With his
tin flared so high, Spook felt like he was standing next to her. He
could see her deep, sorrowful eyes, reflecting light from the shining
building behind her.
There was a bench
in the yard. It sat before a small shrub. It was the only plant left
in the garden; the rest had been torn up and plowed under, leaving
behind blackish brown earth. From what Spook had heard, the Citizen
had declared that ornamental gardens were of the nobility. He claimed
that such places had only been possible through the sweat of skaa
slaves—just another way the nobility had achieved high levels
of luxury by creating equally high levels of work for their servants.
When the people of
Urteau had whitewashed the city's murals and shattered its
stained-glass windows, they had also torn up all the ornamental
gardens.
Beldre sat down on
her bench, hands held motionless in her lap, looking down at the sad
shrub. Spook tried to convince himself that she wasn't the
reason why he made certain to always sneak in and listen to the
Citizen's evening conferences, and he was mostly successful. These
were some of the best spying opportunities Spook got. Being able to
see Beldre was simply a bonus. Not that he cared that much,
of course. He didn't even know her.
He thought that
even as he sat there, staring down at her, wishing he had some way to
talk to her.
But, this wasn't
the time for that. Beldre's exile to the garden meant that her
brother's meeting was about to start. He always kept her near, but
apparently didn't want her hearing state secrets. Unfortunately for
him, his window opened toward Spook's vantage point. No normal
man—not even an ordinary Tineye or Mistborn—could have
heard what was being said inside. But Spook wasn't, by any stretched
definition of the word, normal.
I won't be
useless anymore, he thought with determination as he listened
for words spoken in confidence. They passed through the walls, across
the short space, and arrived at his ears.
"All right,
Olid," said a voice. "What news?" The voice was, by
now, familiar to Spook. Quellion, the Citizen of Urteau.
"Elend Venture
has conquered another city," said a second voice—Olid, the
foreign minister.
"Where?"
Quellion demanded. "What city?"
"An
unimportant one," Olid said. "To the south. Barely five
thousand people."
"It makes no
sense," said a third voice. "He immediately abandoned the
city, taking its populace with him."
"But he got
another koloss army, somehow," Olid added.
Good, Spook
thought. The fourth storage cavern was theirs. Luthadel wouldn't
starve for a while yet. That only left two to secure—the one
here in Urteau, and the last one, wherever that turned out to be.
"A tyrant
needs no real reason for what he does," Quellion said. He was a
young man, but not foolish. At times, he sounded like other men Spook
had known. Wise men. The difference, then, was one of extremity.
Or, perhaps,
timing?
"A tyrant
simply conquers for the thrill of control," Quellion continued.
"Venture isn't satisfied with the lands he's taken—he
never will be. He'll just keep on conquering. Until he comes for us."
The room fell
silent.
"He's
reportedly sending an ambassador to Urteau," the third voice
said. "A member of the Survivor's own crew."
Spook perked up.
Quellion snorted.
"One of the liars? Coming here?"
"To offer us a
treaty, the rumors say," Olid said.
"So?"
Quellion asked. "Why do you mention this, Olid? Do you think we
should make a pact with the tyrant?"
"We can't
fight him, Quellion," Olid said.
"The Survivor
couldn't fight the Lord Ruler," Quellion said. "But he did
anyway. He died, but still won, giving the skaa courage to rebel and
overthrow the nobility."
"Until that
bastard Venture took control," the third voice said.
The room fell
silent again.
"We can't give
in to Venture," Quellion finally said. "I will not hand
this city to a nobleman, not after what the Survivor did for us. Of
all the Final Empire, only Urteau achieved Kelsier's goal of a
skaa-ruled nation. Only we burned the homes of the nobility. Only we
cleansed our town of them and their society. Only we obeyed. The
Survivor will watch over us."
Spook shivered
quietly. It felt very strange to be hearing men he didn't know speak
of Kelsier in such tones. Spook had walked with Kelsier, learned from
Kelsier. What right did these men have to speak as if they had known
the man who had become their Survivor?
The conversation
turned to matters more mundane. They discussed new laws that would
forbid certain kinds of clothing once favored by the nobility, and
then made a decision to give more funding to the genealogical survey
committee. They needed to root out any in the city who were hiding
noble parentage. Spook took notes so he could pass them on to the
others. However, he had trouble keeping his eyes from trailing back
down to the young woman in the garden.
What brings her
such sorrow? he wondered. A part of him wanted to ask—to
be brash, as the Survivor would have been, and hop down to demand of
this solemn, solitary girl why she stared at that plant with such
melancholy. In fact, he found himself moving to stand before he
caught himself.
He might be unique,
he might be powerful, but—as he had to remind himself again—he
was no Mistborn. His was the way of silence and stealth.
So, he settled
back. Content, for the moment, to lean down and watch her, feeling
that somehow—despite their distance, despite his ignorance—he
understood that feeling in her eyes.

The ash.
I don't think
the people really understood how fortunate they were. During the
thousand years before the Collapse, they pushed the ash into rivers,
piled it up outside of cities, and generally just let it be. They
never understood that without the microbes and plants Rashek had
developed to break down the ash particles, the land would quickly
have been buried.
Though, of
course, that did eventually happen anyway.





15
THE MISTS
BURNED. Bright, flaring, lit by the red sunlight, they
seemed a fire that enveloped her.
Mist during the day
was unnatural. But even the nightmists didn't seem to be Vin's
anymore. Once, they had shadowed and protected her. Now she found
them increasingly alien. When she used Allomancy it seemed that the
mists pulled away from her slightly—like a wild beast shying
away from a bright light.
She stood alone
before the camp, which was silent despite the fact that the sun had
risen hours ago. So far, Elend continued to keep his army protected
from the mists by ordering them to remain in their tents. Ham argued
that exposing them wasn't necessary, but Vin's instinct said that
Elend would stick to his plan to order his soldiers into the mist.
They needed to be immune.
Why? Vin
thought, looking up through the sunlit mists. Why have you
changed? What is different? The mists danced around her, moving
in their usual, strange pattern of shifting streams and swirls. It
seemed to Vin that they began to move more rapidly. Quivering.
Vibrating.
The sun seemed to
grow hotter, and the mists finally retreated, vanishing like water
evaporating on a warming pan. The sunlight hit her like a wave, and
Vin turned, watching the mists go, their death like an echoing
scream.
They're not
natural, Vin thought as guards called the all clear. The camp
immediately began to shift and move, men striding from tents, going
about the morning's activity with a flair of urgency. Vin stood at
the head of the camp, dirt road beneath her feet, motionless canal to
her right. Both seemed more real now that the mists were
gone.
She had asked Sazed
and Elend their opinions of the mists—whether they were natural
or . . . something else. And both men, like the scholars they were,
had quoted theories to support both sides of the argument.
Sazed, at least, had eventually made a decision—he'd come down
on the side of the mists being natural.
Even the way
that the mists choke some people, leaving others alive, could be
explained, Lady Vin, he had explained. After all, insect
stings kill some people, while barely bothering others.
Vin wasn't that
interested in theories and arguments. She had spent most of her life
thinking of the mists like any other weather pattern. Reen and the
other thieves had mostly scoffed at tales that made the mists out to
be supernatural. Yet, as Vin had become an Allomancer, she had grown
to know the mists. She felt them, a sense that seemed to
have grown even more potent on the day she'd touched the power of the
Well of Ascension.
They disappeared
too quickly. When they burned away in the sunlight, they withdrew
like a person fleeing for safety. Like . . . a man who used all of
his strength fighting, then finally gave up to retreat. In addition,
the mists didn't appear indoors. A simple tent was enough to protect
the men inside. It was as if the mists somehow understood that they
were excluded, unwelcome.
Vin glanced back
toward the sun, glowing like a scarlet ember behind the dark haze of
the upper atmosphere. She wished TenSoon were there, so she could
talk to him about her worries. She missed the kandra a great deal,
more than she'd ever assumed that she would. His simple frankness had
been a good match to her own. She still didn't know what had happened
to him after he'd returned to his people; she'd tried to find another
kandra to deliver a message for her, but the creatures had become
very scarce lately.
She sighed and
turned, walking quietly back into camp.
It was impressive
how quickly the men managed to get the army moving. They spent the
mornings sequestered inside their tents, caring for armor and
weapons, the cooks preparing what they could. By the time Vin had
crossed a short distance, cooking fires had burst alight, and tents
began to collapse, soldiers working quickly to prepare for departure.
As she passed, some
of the men saluted. Others bowed their heads in reverence. Still
others glanced away, looking uncertain. Vin didn't blame them. Even
she wasn't sure what her place was in the army. As Elend's
wife, she was technically their empress, though she wore no royal
garb. To many, she was a religious figure, the Heir of the Survivor.
She didn't really want that title either.
She found Elend and
Ham conversing outside of the imperial tent, which was in an early
stage of disassembly. Though they stood out in the open, their
mannerisms completely nonchalant, Vin was immediately struck by how
far the two men were standing from the workers, as if Elend and Ham
didn't want the men to hear. Burning tin, she could make out what
they were saying long before she reached them.
"Ham,"
Elend said quietly, "you know I'm right. We can't keep doing
this. The further we penetrate into the Western Dominance, the more
daylight we'll lose to the mists."
Ham shook his head.
"You'd really stand by and watch your own soldiers die, El?"
Elend's face grew
hard, and he met Vin's eyes as she joined them. "We can't afford
to wait out the mists every morning."
"Even if it
saves lives?" Ham asked.
"Slowing down
costs lives," Elend said. "Each hour we spend out
here brings the mists closer to the Central Dominance. We're planning
to be at siege for some time, Ham—and that means we need to get
to Fadrex as soon as possible."
Ham glanced at Vin,
looking for support. She shook her head. "I'm sorry, Ham. Elend
is right. We can't have our entire army dependent upon the whims of
the mists. We'd be exposed—if someone attacked us in the
morning, our men would either have to respond and get struck down by
the mists, or hide in their tents and wait."
Ham frowned, then
excused himself, tromping through the fallen ash to help a group of
soldiers pack away their tents. Vin stepped up beside Elend, watching
the large soldier go.
"Kelsier was
wrong about him," she finally said.
"Who?"
Elend asked. "Ham?"
Vin nodded. "At
the end—after Kelsier died—we found a last note from him.
He said that he'd chosen the members of the crew to be leaders in his
new government. Breeze to be an ambassador, Dockson to be a
bureaucrat, and Ham to be a general. The other two fit their roles
perfectly, but Ham . . ."
"He gets too
involved," Elend said. "He has to know each man he commands
personally or it makes him uncomfortable. And, when he knows them all
that well, he grows attached."
Vin nodded quietly,
watching Ham begin to laugh and work with the soldiers.
"Listen to
us," Elend said, "callously talking about the lives of
those who follow us. Perhaps it would be better to grow attached,
like Ham. Maybe then I wouldn't be so quick to order people to their
deaths."
Vin glanced at
Elend, concerned at the bitterness in his voice. He smiled, trying to
cover it up, then glanced away. "You need to do something with
that koloss of yours. He's been poking around the camp, scaring the
men."
Vin frowned. As
soon as she thought of the creature, she became aware of where it
was—near the edge of the camp. It was always under her command,
but she could only take direct, full control of it when she
concentrated. Otherwise, it would follow her general orders—staying
in the area, not killing anything.
"I should go
make sure the barges are ready to move," Elend said. He glanced
at her, and when she didn't indicate that she'd go with him, he gave
her a quick kiss, then departed.
Vin moved through
the camp again. Most of the tents were down and stowed, and the
soldiers were making quick work of their food. She passed out of the
perimeter, and found Human sitting quietly, ash drifting slightly
against his legs. He watched the camp with red eyes, his face broken
by the ripped skin which hung from his right eye down to the corner
of his mouth.
"Human,"
she said, folding her arms.
He looked over at
her, then stood, ash falling from his eleven-foot, overly muscled
blue figure. Even with the number of creatures she'd killed, even
knowing she controlled this one completely, Vin had a moment of
reflexive fear as she stood before the massive beast with its tightly
stretched skin and bleeding rips.
"Why did you
come to camp?" she said, shaking off her panic.
"I am human,"
he said with his slow, deliberate tone.
"You're
koloss," she said. "You know that."
"I should have
a house," Human said. "Like those."
"Those are
tents, not houses," Vin said. "You can't come to camp like
this. You have to stay with the other koloss."
Human turned,
glancing toward the south, where the koloss army waited, separate
from the humans. They remained under Elend's control, twenty thousand
in number, now that they'd picked up the ten thousand that had been
waiting with the main bulk of the army. It made more sense to leave
them under Elend's control, since—in terms of raw power—he
was a much stronger Allomancer than Vin.
Human looked back
at Vin. "Why?"
"Why do you
have to stay with the others?" Vin asked. "Because you make
the people in the camp uncomfortable."
"Then they
should attack me," Human said.
"That's why
you're not a human," Vin said. "We don't attack people just
because they make us uncomfortable."
"No,"
Human said. "You make us kill them instead."
Vin paused, cocking
her head. Human, however, just looked away, staring at the human camp
again. His beady red eyes made his face hard to read, but Vin almost
sensed a . . . longing in his expression.
"You're one of
us," Human said.
Vin looked up.
"Me?"
"You're like
us," he said. "Not like them."
"Why do you
say that?" Vin asked.
Human looked down
at her. "Mist," he said.
Vin felt a
momentary chill, though she had no real idea why. "What do you
mean?"
Human didn't
respond.
"Human,"
she said, trying another tactic. "What do you think of the
mists?"
"They come at
night."
Vin nodded. "Yes,
but what do you think of them. Your people. Do they fear the mists?
Does it ever kill them?"
"Swords kill,"
Human said. "Rain doesn't kill. Ash doesn't kill. Mist doesn't
kill."
Fairly good
logic, Vin thought. A year ago, I would have agreed with it.
She was about to give up on the line of reasoning, but Human
continued.
"I hate it,"
he said.
Vin paused.
"I hate it
because it hates me," Human said. He looked at her. "You
feel it."
"Yes,"
Vin said, surprising herself. "I do."
Human regarded her,
a line of blood trailing out of the ripped skin near his eye, running
stark down his blue skin, mixing with flakes of ash. Finally, he
nodded, as if giving approval to her honest reply.
Vin shivered. The
mist isn't alive, she thought. It can't hate me. I'm
imagining things.
But . . . once,
years ago, she had drawn upon the mists. When fighting the Lord
Ruler, she had somehow gained a power over them. It had been as if
she'd used the mist itself to fuel her Allomancy instead of metals.
It was only with that power that she'd been able to defeat the Lord
Ruler.
That had been a
long time ago, and she'd never been able to replicate the event.
She'd tried time and again over the years, and after so many
failures, she was beginning to think that she must have been
mistaken. Certainly, in more recent times, the mists had been
unfriendly. She tried to keep telling herself that there was nothing
supernatural about it, but she knew that wasn't true. What of the
mist spirit, the thing that had tried to kill Elend—and then
had saved him by showing her how to make him into an Allomancer? It
was real, of that she was certain, even if she hadn't seen it in over
a year.
What of the
hesitance she felt toward the mists, the way they pulled away from
her? The way they stayed out of buildings, and the way they killed.
It all seemed to point to what Human had said. The mists—the
Deepness—hated her. And, finally, she acknowledged what she had
been resisting for so long.
The mists were her
enemy.

They are called
Allomantic savants. Men or women who flare their metals so long, and
so hard, that the constant influx of Allomantic power transforms
their very physiology.
In most cases,
with most metals, the effects of this are very slight. Bronze
burners, for instance, often become bronze savants without knowing
it. Their range is expanded from burning the metal so long. Becoming
a pewter savant is dangerous, as it requires pushing the body so hard
in a state where one cannot feel exhaustion or pain. Most
accidentally kill themselves before the process is complete, and in
my opinion, the benefit isn't worth the effort.
Tin savants,
however . . . now, they are something special. Endowed with senses
beyond what any normal Allomancer would need—or even want—they
become slaves to what they touch, hear, see, smell, and taste. Yet,
the abnormal power of these senses gives them a distinct, and
interesting, advantage.
One could argue
that, like an Inquisitor who has been transformed by a Hemalurgic
spike, the Allomantic savant is no longer even human.





16
SPOOK AWOKE
TO DARKNESS.
That was happening
less and less frequently lately. He could feel the blindfold on his
face, tied tightly across his eyes and over his ears. It dug into his
overly sensitive skin, but it was far better than the alternative.
Starlight was as bright as the sun to his eyes, and footsteps in the
hallway outside his room could sound like thunderclaps. Even with the
thick cloth, even with his ears plugged with wax, even with the
shutters drawn tight and hung with a cloth, it was sometimes hard for
him to sleep.
The muffling was
dangerous. It left him vulnerable. And yet, lack of sleep would be
even more dangerous. Perhaps the things he'd done to his body by
burning tin would kill him. Yet, the more time he spent among the
people of Urteau, the more he felt they were going to need his help
to survive the dangers that were coming. He needed an edge. He
worried that he'd made the wrong decision, but at least he'd made a
decision. He would continue as he had, and hope that it was enough.
He groaned quietly,
sitting up, taking off the cloth and pulling the wax from his ears.
The room was dark, but even the faint light creeping through the
shutters—their gaps stuffed with cloth—was enough for him
to see by.
Tin flared
comfortably in his stomach. His reserve was nearly gone, burned away
during the night. His body now used it as instinctively as it drew
breath or blinked. He had heard that Thugs could burn pewter to heal
their bodies even if they were unconscious from their wounds. The
body understood what it needed.
He reached into a
small pail beside his bed, pulling out a small handful of tin dust.
He'd brought a lot with him from Luthadel, and augmented this by
buying more through the underground. Fortunately, tin was relatively
cheap. He dumped his handful into a mug on his nightstand, then moved
to the door. The room was small and cramped, but he didn't have to
share it with anyone. That made it lavish by skaa standards.
He squeezed his
eyes shut, then pulled open the door. The luminosity of a sunlit
hallway crashed against him. He gritted his teeth against the light,
intense despite his shut eyelids, and felt about on the ground. He
found the jug of fresh water—drawn from the well for him by the
inn's servants—and pulled it inside, then shut the door.
He blinked, walking
across the room to fill his mug. He drank it, washing down the tin.
It would be enough for the entire day. He took an extra handful and
stuffed it into a pouch, just in case.
A few minutes later
he was dressed and ready. He sat down on the bed, closing his eyes,
preparing for the day. If the Citizen's spies were to be believed,
other members of Elend's team were on their way to Urteau. They were
probably under orders to secure the storage cache and quell the
rebellion; Spook would need to learn as much as he could before they
arrived.
He sat, going over
plans, thinking to himself. He could feel feet thumping in the rooms
around him—the wooden structure seemed to shake and tremble
like some enormous hive filled with bustling workers. Outside, he
could hear voices calling, yelling, speaking. Bells rang faintly. It
was early yet, barely past noon, but the mists would be gone—Urteau
got about six or seven hours of mistless daylight, making it a place
where crops could still grow and man could still thrive.
Normally, Spook
would have slept through the hours of daylight. However, there were
things he needed to do. He opened his eyes, then reached to his
night-stand, picking up a pair of spectacles. They had been specially
crafted, at his request, to hold lenses that made no corrections to
his vision. They were just filled with regular glass.
He put these on,
then retied the cloth around his head, covering the front and sides
of the lenses. Even with his heightened senses, he couldn't see
through his own eyelids. However, with the spectacles on, he could
open his eyes and wear the cloth at the same time. He felt his way to
the window, then he pulled off the blanket and threw open the
shutters.
Hot—nearly
scalding—sunlight bathed him. The cloth bit into the skin of
his head. But he could see. The cloth blocked just enough light to
keep him from being blinded, yet was translucent enough to allow
vision. It was like the mists, actually—the cloth was nearly
invisible to him, for his eyes were enhanced beyond the point of
reason. His mind just filtered out the cloth's interference.
Spook nodded to
himself, then picked up his dueling cane and made his way from the
room.
"I know you're
a quiet one," Durn said, rapping softly on the ground in front
of him with a pair of sticks. "But even you have to admit that
this is better than living under the lords."
Spook sat in a
streetslot, back to the stone wall that had sustained the canal, head
bowed slightly. Marketpit was the widest of the streetslots of
Urteau. Once, it had been a waterway so broad that three boats
abreast could moor in its center while leaving room on both sides for
the passage of others in either direction. Now it had become a
central boulevard for the city, which also made it a prime location
for tradesmen and beggars.
Beggars like Spook
and Durn. They sat at the very side of the slot, buildings looming
like fortress walls above. Few of the passers paid any attention to
the ragged men. Nobody paused to notice that one of them seemed to be
watching the crowd carefully, despite the dark cloth over his eyes,
while the other spoke far too articulately to have been educated in
the gutter.
Spook didn't
respond to Durn's question. In his youth, the way he spoke—with
a thick accent, language littered with slang—had marked him,
made people dismiss him. Even now, he didn't have a glib tongue or
charming manner like Kelsier's. So, instead, Spook just tried to say
as little as possible. Less chance of getting himself into trouble
that way.
Oddly, instead of
finding him easier to dismiss when he didn't talk, it seemed
that people paid more attention to him. Durn continued to pound out
his rhythm, like a street performer with no audience. It was too soft
against the earthen floor for anyone to hear—unless one were
Spook.
Durn's rhythm was
perfect. Any minstrel would have envied him.
"I mean, look
at the market," Durn continued. "Under the Lord Ruler, most
skaa could never engage openly in commerce. We have something
beautiful here. Skaa ruling skaa. We're happy."
Spook could see the
market. It seemed to him that if the people were truly happy, they'd
wear smiles, rather than downcast looks. They'd be shopping and
browsing, rather than quickly picking out what they wanted, then
moving on. Plus, if the city were the happy utopia it was supposed to
be, there wouldn't be a need for the dozens of soldiers who watched
the crowd. Spook shook his head. Everybody wore nearly the exact same
clothing—colors and styles dictated by the Citizen's orders.
Even begging was heavily regulated. Men would soon arrive to count
Spook's offerings, tally how much he had earned, then take the
Citizen's cut.
"Look,"
Durn said, "do you see anyone being beaten or killed on the
street? Surely that's worth a few strictures."
"The deaths
happen in quiet alleys now," Spook said softly. "At least
the Lord Ruler killed us openly."
Durn frowned,
sitting back, thumping the ground with his sticks. It was a complex
pattern. Spook could feel the vibrations through the ground, and
found them soothing. Did the people know the talent they passed,
quietly beating the ground they walked upon? Durn could have been a
master musician. Unfortunately, under the Lord Ruler, skaa didn't
play music. And under the Citizen . . . well, it generally wasn't
good to draw attention to yourself, no matter what the method.
"There it is,"
Durn said suddenly. "As promised."
Spook glanced up.
Through the mutters, the sounds, the flashes of color and the
powerful scents of refuse, people, and goods for sale, Spook saw a
group of prisoners, being escorted by soldiers in brown. Sometimes,
the flood of sensation was almost overwhelming to him. However, as
he'd once told Vin, burning tin wasn't about what one could sense,
but about what one could ignore. And he had learned very well to
focus on the senses he needed, shunting aside that which would
distract.
The market goers
made way for the group of soldiers and their prisoners. The people
bowed their heads, watching solemnly.
"You still
want to follow?" Durn asked.
Spook stood.
Durn nodded, then
stood and grabbed Spook by the shoulder. He knew that Spook could
really see—or, at least, Spook assumed that Durn was observant
enough to have noticed that fact. They both maintained the act,
however. It was common among beggars to adopt a guise of being
afflicted in an attempt to elicit more coins. Durn himself walked
with a masterful false limp, and had his hair pulled out in sickly
patches. Yet, Spook could smell soap on the man's skin and fine wine
on his breath. He was a thief lord; there were few more powerful in
the city. Yet, he was clever enough with his disguises that he could
walk about on the streets unnoticed.
They weren't the
only ones following the soldiers and their prisoners. Skaa wearing
the approved gray trailed the group like ghosts—a quiet,
shuffling mass in the falling ash. The soldiers walked to a ramp
leading out of the streetslots, guiding the people into a wealthier
section of the town, where some of the canals had been filled in and
cobbled.
Soon, the dead
spots began to appear. Charred scars—ruins that had once been
homes. The smell of smoke was almost overpowering to Spook, and he
had to start breathing through his mouth. They didn't have to walk
very far before arriving at their destination. The Citizen himself
was in attendance. He rode no horse—those had all been shipped
to the farms, for only crass noblemen were too good to walk the
ground on their own feet. He did, however, wear red.
"What's that
he's wearing?" Spook whispered as Durn led him around the side
of the crowd. The Citizen and his retinue stood on the steps of a
particularly grand mansion, and the skaa were clustering around. Durn
led Spook to a place where a group of toughs had muscled themselves
an exclusive piece of the street with a good vantage of the Citizen.
They nodded to Durn, letting him pass without comment.
"What do you
mean?" Durn asked. "The Citizen is wearing what he always
does—skaa trousers and a work shirt."
"They're red,"
Spook whispered. "That's not an approved color."
"As of this
morning it is. Government officers can wear it. That way, they stand
out, and people in need can find them. Or, at least, that's the
official explanation."
Spook frowned.
However, something else caught his attention.
She was there.
It was natural, of
course—she accompanied her brother wherever he went. He was
particularly worried for her safety, and seldom let her out of his
sight. She wore the same look as always, eyes sorrowful within a
frame of auburn hair.
"Sad group
today," Durn said, and at first Spook thought he was referring
to Beldre. However, Durn was nodding toward the group of prisoners.
They looked just like the rest of the people in the city—gray
clothing, ash-stained faces, subservient postures. The Citizen,
however, stepped forward to explain the differences.
"One of the
first proclamations this government made," he announced, "was
one of solidarity. We are a skaa people. The 'noblemen' chosen by the
Lord Ruler oppressed us for ten centuries. Urteau, we decided, would
become a place of freedom. A place like the Survivor himself
prophesied would come."
"You've got
the count?" Durn whispered to Spook.
Spook nodded.
"Ten," he said, counting the prisoners. "The ones we
expected. You're not earning your coin, Durn."
"Watch."
"These,"
the Citizen said, bald scalp shining in the red sunlight as he
pointed at the prisoners. "These didn't heed our warning. They
knew, as all of you know, that any nobleman who stayed in this city
would forfeit his life! This is our will—all of our
will.
"But, like all
of their kind, these were too arrogant to listen. They tried to hide.
But, they think themselves above us. They always will. That exposes
them."
He paused, then
spoke again. "And that is why we do what we must."
He waved his
soldiers forward. They shoved the prisoners up the steps. Spook could
smell the oil on the air as the soldiers opened the house's doors and
pushed the people in. Then, the soldiers barred the door from the
outside and took up a perimeter. Each soldier lit a torch and threw
it on the building. It didn't take superhuman senses to feel the heat
that soon blazed to life, and the crowd shied back—revolted and
frightened, but fascinated.
The windows had
been boarded shut. Spook could see fingers trying to pry the wood
free, could hear people screaming. He could hear them thumping
against the locked door, trying to break their way out, crying in
terror.
He longed to do
something. Yet, even with tin, he couldn't fight an entire squad of
soldiers on his own. Elend and Vin had sent him to gather
information, not play their hand. Still, he cringed, calling himself
a coward as he turned away from the burning building.
"This should
not be," Spook whispered harshly.
"They were
noblemen," Durn said.
"No they
weren't! Their parents might have been, but these were skaa. Normal
people, Durn."
"They have
noble blood."
"So do we all,
if you look back far enough," Spook said.
Durn shook his
head. "This is the way it has to be. This is the Survivor—"
"Do not
speak his name in association with this barbarity," Spook
hissed.
Durn was quiet for
a moment, the only sounds that of the flames and those dying inside
them. Finally, he spoke. "I know it's hard to see, and perhaps
the Citizen is too eager. But . . . I heard him speak once.
The Survivor. This is the sort of thing he taught. Death to the
noblemen; rule by the skaa. If you'd heard him, you'd understand.
Sometimes, you have to destroy something in order to build something
better."
Spook closed his
eyes. Heat from the fire seemed to be searing his skin. He had
heard Kelsier speak to crowds of skaa. And, Kelsier had said the
things that Durn now referred to. Then, the Survivor had been a voice
of hope, of spirit. His same words repeated now, however, became
words of hatred and destruction. Spook felt sick.
"Again, Durn,"
he said, looking up, feeling particularly harsh, "I don't pay
you to spout Citizen propaganda at me. Tell me why I'm here, or
you'll get no further coin from me."
The large beggar
turned, meeting Spook's eyes behind the cloth. "Count the
skulls," he said quietly. With that, Durn took his hand off
Spook's shoulder and retreated into the crowd.
Spook didn't
follow. The scents of smoke and burning flesh were growing too
powerful for him. He turned, pushing his way through the crowd,
seeking fresh air. He stumbled up against a building, breathing
deeply, feeling the rough grain of its wood press against his side.
It seemed to him that the falling flakes of ash were a part of the
pyre behind, bits of death cast upon the wind.
He heard voices.
Spook turned, noting that the Citizen and his guards had moved away
from the fire. Quellion was addressing the crowd, encouraging them to
be vigilant. Spook watched for a time, and finally the crowd began to
leave, trailing the Citizen as he moved back toward the market pit.
He's punished
them, now he needs to bless them. Often, especially after
executions, the Citizen visited the people personally, moving between
stalls in the market, shaking hands and giving encouragement.
Spook took off down
a side street. He soon passed out of the wealthier section of town,
arriving at a place where the street fell away before him. He chose a
place where the retaining wall had collapsed, forming a slope down
into the dry canal, then hopped down, skidding his way to the bottom.
He pulled up the hood of his cloak, obscuring his covered eyes, and
made his way through the busy street with the dexterity of one who
had grown up a street urchin.
Even taking a more
roundabout route, he arrived at Marketpit before the Citizen and his
retinue. Spook watched through the raining ash as the man moved down
a broad ramp of earth, trailed by a following that numbered in the
hundreds.
You want to be
him, Spook thought, crouching beside a merchant's stall. Kelsier
died to bring this people hope, and now you think to steal his
legacy.
This man was no
Kelsier. This man wasn't even worthy to utter the Survivor's name.
The Citizen moved
about, maintaining a paternal air, speaking to the people of the
market. He touched them on the shoulders, shook hands, and smiled
benevolently. "The Survivor would be proud of you." Spook
could hear his voice even over the noise of the crowd. "The ash
that falls is a sign from him—it represents the fall of the
empire, the ashes of tyranny. From those ashes we will make a new
nation! One ruled by skaa."
Spook edged
forward, putting down the top of his hood and feeling before himself
with his hands, as if he were blind. He carried his dueling cane
across his back, in a strap obscured by the folds of his baggy gray
shirt. He was more than capable when it came to moving through
crowds. While Vin had always worked hard to remain obscure and
unseen, Spook had managed to achieve both things without ever trying.
In fact, he'd often tried the opposite. He'd dreamed of being a man
like Kelsier—for even before he'd met the Survivor, Spook had
heard stories of the man. The greatest skaa thief of their time—a
man bold enough to try to rob the Lord Ruler himself.
And yet, try as he
might, Spook had never been able to distinguish himself. It was just
too easy to ignore yet another ash-faced boy, especially if you
couldn't understand his thick Eastern slang. It had taken actually
meeting Kelsier—seeing how he could move people by talking—to
finally convince Spook to abandon his dialect. That was when Spook
had begun to understand that there was a power in words.
Spook subtly moved
his way toward the front of the crowd watching the Citizen. He got
jostled and shoved, but nobody cried out against him. A blind man who
had gotten caught up in the press of people was easy to ignore—and
what was ignored could get where it wasn't supposed to. With some
careful positioning, Spook soon placed himself at the front of the
group, barely an arm's length from the Citizen.
The man smelled of
smoke.
"I understand,
good woman," the Citizen was saying as he held an elderly
woman's hands. "But your grandson is needed where he is, working
the fields. Without him and his kind, we would not be able to eat! A
nation ruled by skaa also has to be one worked by skaa."
"But . . .
can't he come back, even for a bit?" the woman asked.
"In time, good
woman," the Citizen said. "In time." His crimson
uniform made him the only splash of color on the street, and Spook
found himself staring. He tore his eyes away and continued to
maneuver, for the Citizen was not his goal.
Beldre stood to the
side, as usual. Always watching, but never interacting. The Citizen
was so dynamic that his sister was easily forgotten. Spook understood
that feeling quite well. He let a soldier jostle him, pushing him out
of the Citizen's way. That jostle placed Spook right next to Beldre.
She smelt just faintly of perfume.
I thought that
was supposed to be forbidden.
What would Kelsier
have done? He'd have attacked, perhaps, killing the Citizen. Or, he'd
have moved against the man in another way. Kelsier wouldn't have let
such terrible things happen—he'd have acted.
Perhaps he would
have tried to make an ally out of someone trusted by the Citizen?
Spook felt his
heart—always so much louder to him now—beat faster. The
crowd began to move again, and he let himself get shoved up against
Beldre. The guards weren't watching—they were focused on the
Citizen, keeping him safe with so many random elements around.
"Your
brother," Spook whispered in her ear, "you approve of his
murders?"
She spun, and he
noticed for the first time that her eyes were green. He stood in the
crowd, letting it shove him away as she searched, trying to figure
out who had spoken. The crowd, following her brother, carried her
from Spook.
Spook waited, being
jostled in the sea of elbows, for a short time. Then he began to
maneuver again, pushing through the people with subtle care until he
was again beside Beldre.
"You think
this is any different from what the Lord Ruler did?" he
whispered. "I once saw him gather up random people and execute
them in the Luthadel city square."
She spun again,
finally identifying Spook among the moving crowd. He stood still,
meeting her eyes despite the blindfold. People moved between them,
and she was carried away.
Her mouth moved.
Only someone with the enhanced senses of tin could have seen with
enough detail to make out the words on her lips.
"Who are you?"
He pushed his way
through the crowd one more time. The Citizen was apparently planning
to make a big speech up ahead, capitalizing on the increasingly large
crowd. People were bunching up around the podium that lay in the
middle of the market; it was getting more difficult to move through
them.
Spook reached her,
but felt the crowd pulling him away again. So, he reached between a
pair of bodies and grabbed her hand, pulling her wrist as he moved
with the surgings of the crowd's motion. She spun, of course, but she
didn't cry out. The crowd moved around them, and she turned to meet
his blindfolded eyes through the throng.
"Who are you?"
Beldre asked again. Though he was close enough to have heard her had
she spoken, no sound escaped her lips. She just mouthed the words.
Behind her, on the podium, her brother began to preach.
"I'm the man
who will kill your brother," Spook said softly.
Again, he had
expected a reaction from her—a scream, perhaps. An accusation.
His actions here had been impulsive, born from his frustration at not
being able to help the people who were executed. If she did
scream, he realized, it could bring his death.
Yet she remained
silent, flakes of ash falling between them.
"Others have
said that same thing," she mouthed.
"Others were
not me."
"And who are
you?" she asked a third time.
"The companion
of a god. A man who can see whispers and feel screams."
"A man who
thinks he knows better for this people than their own chosen ruler?"
she mouthed. "There will always be dissenters who balk at what
must be done."
He still had her
hand. He gripped it tightly, pulling her close. The crowd crowded the
podium, leaving her and Spook at their rear, like shells left on a
beach by the retreating waves.
"I knew
the Survivor, Beldre," he whispered harshly. "He named me,
called me friend. What you've done in this city would horrify him—and
I'm not going to let your brother continue to pervert
Kelsier's legacy. Bring him warning, if you must. Tell Quellion that
I'm coming for him."
The Citizen had
stopped speaking. Spook glanced up, looking toward the lectern.
Quellion stood upon it, looking out over his crowd of followers.
Looking at Spook and Beldre, standing together at the back of the
crowd. Spook hadn't realized how exposed they had become.
"You there!"
the Citizen cried. "What are you doing with my sister!"
Damn! Spook
thought, releasing the girl and dashing away. However, one major
inconvenience of the streetslots was their high, steep walls. There
were very few ways to get out of the market, and those were all being
watched by members of Quellion's security forces. At the Citizen's
shouted command, soldiers began to dash forward from their posts,
wearing leather and carrying steel.
Fine, Spook
thought, charging the nearest group of soldiers. If he could get
through them, he could reach a ramp up, perhaps disappear into the
alleys between buildings above.
Swords scraped from
scabbards. Behind Spook, people cried out in shock. He reached into
the ragged tears of his cloak and whipped forth his dueling cane.
And then, he was
among them.
Spook wasn't a
warrior, not really. He'd trained with Ham, of course—Clubs had
insisted that his nephew know how to defend himself. However, the
crew's true warriors had always been their Mistborn, Vin and Kelsier,
with Ham—as a Pewterarm—providing brute force, if
necessary.
Yet, Spook had
spent a lot of time training, lately, and while doing so he had
discovered something interesting. He had something that Vin and
Kelsier could never have had: a blurring array of sensory knowledge
that his body could instinctively use. He could feel disturbances in
the air, sense tremors in the floor, and could know where people were
simply by how close their heartbeats sounded.
He was no Mistborn,
but he was still very dangerous. He felt a soft wind, and knew a
sword was swinging for him. He ducked. He felt a footstep on the
ground, and knew someone was attacking from the side. He stepped
away. It was almost like having atium.
Sweat flew from his
brow as he spun, and he cracked his dueling cane into the back of one
soldier's head. The man fell—Spook's weapon was crafted of the
finest hardwood. But, just to be certain, he brought the butt of the
weapon down on the fallen man's temple, knocking him out of the
battle for good.
He heard someone
grunt beside him—soft, yet telling. Spook whipped his weapon to
the side and smacked it against the attacking soldier's forearm. The
bones broke, and the soldier cried out, dropping his weapon. Spook
rapped him on the head. Then, Spook spun, lifting his cane to block
the third soldier's strike.
Steel met wood, and
the steel won, Spook's weapon breaking. However, it stopped the sword
strike long enough for Spook to duck away and grab a fallen warrior's
sword. It was different from the swords he'd practiced with—the
men of Urteau preferred long, thin blades. Still, Spook only had one
soldier left—if he could cut the man down, he'd be free.
Spook's opponent
seemed to realize that he had the advantage. If Spook ran, it would
expose his back to attack. However, if Spook stayed, he'd soon be
overwhelmed. The soldier circled warily, trying to stall for time.
So, Spook attacked.
He raised his blade, trusting in his enhanced senses to compensate
for the difference in training. The soldier raised his weapon to
parry as Spook swung.
Spook's sword froze
in the air.
Spook stumbled,
trying to force the weapon forward, but it was strangely held in
place—as if he were trying to push it through something solid,
rather than air. It was as if . . .
Someone was Pushing
against it. Allomancy. Spook glanced desperately around him, and
immediately found the source of the power. The person Pushing had to
be directly opposite Spook, for Allomancers could only Push away from
themselves.
Quellion, the
Citizen, had joined his sister. The Citizen met Spook's gaze, and
Spook could see effort in the man's eyes as he clutched his sister,
using her weight for support as he Pushed against Spook's sword,
interfering in the battle as Kelsier himself once had, long ago when
visiting the caverns where his army trained.
Spook dropped the
weapon, letting it fly backward out of his hands, then threw himself
to the ground. He felt the draft of an enemy sword swinging overhead,
narrowly missing him. His own weapon clanged to the ground a short
distance from him, its ringing loud in his ears.
He didn't have time
to gather his breath; he could only push himself up to dodge the
soldier's follow-up blow. Fortunately, Spook wasn't wearing any metal
that Quellion could Push against to influence the fight any further.
That was a habit that Spook was glad he'd never lost.
The only choice was
to run. He couldn't fight, not with an Allomancer interfering. He
turned while the soldier prepared another swing. Then, Spook threw
himself forward, getting inside the soldier's guard. He ducked under
the man's arm and dashed to the side, hoping to run past and leave
the soldier confused.
Something caught
his foot.
Spook spun. At
first, he assumed that Quellion was Pulling on him somehow. Then, he
saw that the soldier on the ground—the first one he'd
dropped—had grabbed his foot.
I hit that man
in the head twice! Spook thought with frustration. There's
no way he's still conscious!
The hand squeezed
his foot, yanking Spook backward with an inhuman strength. With
strength like that, the man had to be a Thug—a pewter burner,
like Ham.
Spook was in
serious trouble.
Spook kicked,
managing to break free, then stumbled to his feet. But a Thug would
have the power of pewter—he'd be able to run faster, and
farther, than Spook.
Two
Allomancers, counting the Citizen himself, Spook thought.
Somebody isn't as disdainful of noble blood as he claims!
The two soldiers
advanced on him. Yelling in frustration—hearing his own heart
thump like a pounding drum—Spook threw himself at the Thug and
grappled the man, taking him by surprise. In that moment of
confusion, Spook spun him around, using the Thug's body like a shield
to protect himself from the third soldier.
He hadn't counted
on the Citizen's brutal training. Quellion always spoke of sacrifice
and necessity. Apparently, this philosophy extended to his soldiers,
for the man with the sword rammed his weapon straight through his
friend's back, piercing his heart and driving the weapon directly
into Spook's chest. It was a move only a man with the strength and
precision of a Thug could have performed.
Three
Allomancers, Spook thought, dazed, as the soldier tried to pull
his sword free from two bodies. The body of the dead man was a weight
that finally snapped the blade.
How did I even
survive this long? They must have been trying not to reveal their
powers. Trying to remain hidden from the population. . . .
Spook stumbled
backward, feeling blood on his chest. Oddly, he didn't feel pain. His
heightened senses should have made the pain so powerful that—
It hit. Everything
went black.

The subtlety
displayed in the ash-eating microbes and enhanced plants shows that
Rashek got better and better at using the power. It burned out in a
matter of minutes—but to a god, minutes can pass like hours.
During that time, Rashek began as an ignorant child who shoved a
planet too close to the sun, grew into an adult who could create
ashmounts to cool the air, then finally became a mature artisan who
could develop plants and creatures for specific purposes.
It also shows
his mind-set during his time with Preservation's power. Under its
influence he was obviously in a protective mode. Instead of leveling
the ashmounts and trying to push the planet back into place, he was
reactive, working furiously to fix problems that he himself had
caused.





17
ELEND RODE
AT THE FRONT OF HIS MEN, astride a brilliant white stallion
that had been scrubbed clean of ash. He turned his mount, looking
over the ranks of nervous soldiers. They waited in the evening light,
and Elend could see their terror. They had heard rumors, then had
those rumors confirmed by Elend the day before. Today, his army would
become immunized to the mists.
Elend rode through
their ranks, General Demoux riding a roan stallion beside him. Both
horses were big destriers, brought on the trip to impress more than
for usefulness. Elend and the other officers would spend most of the
trip riding in canal boats, rather than on horseback.
He didn't worry
about the morality of his decision to expose his forces to the
mists—at least, he didn't worry about it at that moment. Elend
had learned something very important about himself: He was honest.
Perhaps too honest. If he was uncertain, it would show in his face.
The soldiers would sense his hesitation. So he'd learned to confine
his worries and concerns to times when he was only with those closest
to him. That meant Vin saw too much of his brooding. However, it left
him free at other times to project confidence.
He moved quickly,
letting his horse's hooves beat a thunder for the men to hear.
Occasionally, he heard captains call out for their men to be firm.
Even so, Elend saw the anxiety in his soldiers' eyes. And could he
blame them? This day, the men would face an enemy that they could not
fight, and could not resist. Within the hour, seven hundred of them
would lay dead. About one in fifty. Not bad odds, on a grand
scale—but that meant little to a man standing and feeling the
mist creep around him.
The men stood their
ground. Elend was proud of them. He had given those who wished it the
opportunity to return to Luthadel instead of facing the mists. He
still needed troops in the capital, and he'd rather not march with
men unwilling to go into the mists. Almost none had gone. The vast
majority had instead lined up in full ranks without having to be
ordered, wearing full battle gear, armor polished and oiled, uniforms
looking as clean as possible in the ash-stained wilderness. It seemed
right to Elend for them to be in their armor. It made them seem as if
they were going to battle—and, in a way, they were.
They trusted him.
They knew that the mists were advancing toward Luthadel, and
understood the importance of capturing the cities with storage
caverns. They believed in Elend's ability to do something to save
their families.
Their trust made
him even more determined. He reined in his horse, turning the massive
beast beside a rank of soldiers. He flared pewter, making his body
stronger, giving more power to his lungs, then Rioted the emotions of
the men to make them braver.
"Be strong!"
he shouted.
Heads turned toward
him, and the clanking of armor hushed. His own voice was so loud in
his ears that he had to dampen his tin. "These mists will strike
down some of us. However, most of us will be untouched—and most
who fall will recover! Then, none of us need fear the mists again. We
cannot arrive at Fadrex City without having inoculated
ourselves! If we did so, we would risk being attacked in the morning,
when we are hiding in our tents. Our enemies would force us out into
the mists anyway, and we would have to fight with a sixth of our men
shaking on the ground from sickness!"
He turned his
horse, Demoux following behind, and moved along the ranks. "I do
not know why the mists kill. But I trust in the Survivor! He named
himself Lord of the Mists. If some of us die, then it is his will.
Stay strong!"
His reminders
seemed to have some effect. The soldiers stood a little straighter,
facing west, toward where the sun would soon set. Elend reined in
again, sitting tall and letting himself be seen.
"They look
strong, my lord," Demoux said quietly, moving his horse up
beside Elend's. "It was a good speech."
Elend nodded.
"My lord . .
." Demoux said, "did you mean what you said about the
Survivor?"
"Of course I
did."
"I'm sorry, my
lord," Demoux said. "I didn't mean to question your faith,
it's just that . . . well, you don't have to keep up the charade of
belief, if you don't want to."
"I gave my
word, Demoux," Elend said, frowning and glancing at the scarred
general. "I do what I say."
"I believe
you, my lord," Demoux said. "You are an honorable man."
"But?"
Demoux paused. "But
. . . if you don't really believe in the Survivor, I don't think he
would want you speaking in his name."
Elend opened his
mouth to reprimand Demoux for his lack of respect, but stopped
himself. The man spoke with honesty, from his heart. That wasn't the
kind of thing to punish.
Besides, he might
have had a point. "I don't know what I believe, Demoux,"
Elend said, looking back at the field of soldiers. "Certainly
not in the Lord Ruler. Sazed's religions have been dead for
centuries, and even he has stopped talking about them. It seems to me
that leaves the Church of the Survivor as the only real option."
"With all due
respect, my lord," Demoux said. "That's not a very strong
profession of faith."
"I'm having
trouble with faith lately, Demoux," Elend said, looking up,
watching flakes of ash drift through the air. "My last god was
killed by the woman I eventually married—a woman you claim as a
religious figure, but who spurns your devotion."
Demoux nodded
quietly.
"I don't
reject your god, Demoux," Elend said. "I meant what I
said—I think having faith in Kelsier is better than the
alternatives. And, considering what's going to be coming at us in the
next few months, I'd rather believe that something—anything—is
out there helping us."
They were quiet for
a few moments.
"I know that
the Lady Heir objects to our worship of the Survivor, my lord,"
Demoux finally said. "She knew him, as did I. What she doesn't
understand is that the Survivor has become so much more than just the
man Kelsier."
Elend frowned.
"That sounds like you calculatedly made him a god, Demoux—that
you believe in him as a symbol only."
Demoux shook his
head. "I'm saying that Kelsier was a man, but a man who gained
something—a mantle, a portion of something eternal and
immortal. When he died, he wasn't just Kelsier, the crewleader. Don't
you think it odd that he was never Mistborn before he went to the
Pits?"
"That's the
way Allomancy works, Demoux," Elend said. "You don't gain
your powers until you Snap—until you face something traumatic,
something that nearly kills you."
"And you don't
think that Kelsier experienced those kinds of events before the
Pits?" Demoux asked. "My lord, he was a thief who robbed
from obligators and noblemen. He lived a very dangerous life. You
think he could have avoided beatings, near-deaths, and emotional
anguish?"
Elend paused.
"He gained his
powers at the Pits," Demoux said quietly, "because
something else came upon him. People who knew him speak of how he was
a changed man when he came back. He had purpose—he was driven
to accomplish something the rest of the world thought impossible."
Demoux shook his
head. "No, my lord. Kelsier the man died in those Pits, and
Kelsier the Survivor was born. He was granted great power, and great
wisdom, by a force that is above us all. That is why he
accomplished what he did. That is why we worship him. He
still had the follies of a man, but he had the hopes of a divinity."
Elend turned away.
The rational, scholarly side of him understood exactly what was
happening. Kelsier was gradually being deified, his life made more
and more mystical by those who followed him. Kelsier had to be
invested with heavenly power, for the Church couldn't continue to
revere a mere man.
And yet, another
part of Elend was glad for the rationalization, if only because it
made the story that much more believable. After all, Demoux was
right. How did a man living on the streets last so long
before Snapping?
Someone screamed.
Elend looked up,
scanning the ranks. Men began to shuffle as the mists appeared,
sprouting in the air like growing plants. He couldn't see the soldier
who had fallen. Soon, the point was moot, for others began to scream.
The sun began to be
obscured, blazing red as it approached the horizon. Elend's horse
shuffled nervously. The captains ordered the men to remain steady,
but Elend could still see motion. In the group before him, pockets
appeared in the ranks as men randomly collapsed to the ground, like
marionettes whose strings had been cut. They shook on the ground,
other soldiers backing away in horror, mist moving all around.
They need me,
Elend thought, grabbing his reigns, Pulling on the emotions of
those around him. "Demoux, let's ride."
He turned his
horse. Demoux did not follow.
Elend spun.
"Demoux? What—"
He choked off
immediately. Demoux sat in the mists, shaking horribly. Even as Elend
watched, the balding soldier slipped from his saddle, collapsing to
the ankle-deep ash below.
"Demoux!"
Elend yelled, hopping down, feeling like a fool. He'd never thought
to wonder if Demoux was susceptible—he'd just assumed that he,
like Vin and the others, was already immune. Elend knelt beside
Demoux, his legs in the ash, listening to soldiers scream and
captains yell for order. His friend shook and twisted, gasping in
pain.
And the ash
continued to fall.

Rashek didn't
solve all the world's problems. In fact, with each thing he did fix,
he created new issues. However, he was clever enough that each
subsequent problem was smaller than the ones before it. So, instead
of plants that died from the distorted sun and ashy ground, we got
plants that didn't provide quite enough nutrition.
He did save the
world. True, the near-destruction was his fault in the first
place—but he did an admirable job, all things considered. At
least he didn't release Ruin to the world as we did.





18
SAZED
SLAPPED HIS HORSE ON THE RUMP, sending it galloping away.
The beast's hooves kicked up chunks of packed ash as it ran. Its coat
had once been a keen white; now it was a rough gray. Its ribs were
beginning to show—it was malnourished to the point that it was
no longer reasonable to expect it to carry a rider, and they could no
longer afford to spare food for it.
"Now, that's a
sad sight," Breeze noted, standing beside Sazed on the
ash-covered road. Their guard of two hundred soldiers waited quietly,
watching the beast run. Sazed couldn't help feeling that the release
of their final horse was a symbol.
"You think it
will be able to survive?" Breeze asked.
"I suspect
that it will still be able to poke beneath the ash and find
nourishment for a time," Sazed said. "It will be difficult,
however."
Breeze grunted.
"Living's difficult work for all of us, these days. Well, I wish
the creature the best of luck. Are you going to join Allrianne and me
in the carriage?"
Sazed glanced over
his shoulder, toward the vehicle, which had been lightened, then
rigged to be pulled by soldiers. They had removed the doors and hung
curtains instead, and had removed sections of the back as well. With
the decreased weight and two hundred men to take turns, the vehicle
wouldn't be too much of a burden. Still, Sazed knew he would feel
guilty being pulled by others. His old servant's instincts were too
strong.
"No,"
Sazed said. "I shall walk for a bit. Thank you."
Breeze nodded,
walking to the carriage to sit with Allrianne, a soldier holding a
parasol over his head until he was inside. Now exposed to the ash,
Sazed put up the hood of his travel robe, hefted his portfolio in his
arm, then strode across the black ground to the front of the line.
"Captain
Goradel," he said. "You may continue your march."
They did so. It was
a rough hike—the ash was growing thick, and it was slick and
tiring to walk on. It moved and shifted beneath the feet, almost as
difficult as walking on sand. As hard as the hike was, however, it
wasn't enough to distract Sazed from his troubled feelings. He had
hoped that visiting the army—meeting with Elend and Vin—would
give him a respite. The two were dear friends, and their affection
for one another tended to bolster him. He had, after all, been the
one to perform their marriage.
Yet, this meeting
had left him even more troubled. Vin allowed Elend to die,
he thought. And she did it because of things I taught her.
He carried the
picture of a flower in his sleeve pocket, trying to make sense of his
conversation with Vin. How had Sazed become the one that people came
to with their problems? Couldn't they sense that he was simply a
hypocrite, capable of formulating answers that sounded good, yet
incapable of following his own advice? He felt lost. He felt a
weight, squeezing him, telling him to simply give up.
How easily Elend
spoke of hope and humor, as if being happy were simply a decision one
made. Some people assumed that it was. Once, Sazed might have agreed
with them. Now, his stomach simply twisted, and he felt sick at the
thought of taking pretty much any action. His thoughts were
constantly invaded by doubts.
This is what
religion is for, Sazed thought as he tromped through the ash at
the head of the column, carrying his pack on his shoulders. It
helps people through times like these.
He looked down at
his portfolio. Then, he opened it and leafed through the pages as he
walked. Hundreds finished, and not a single one of the religions had
provided the answers he sought. Perhaps he simply knew them too well.
Most of the crew had trouble worshipping Kelsier as the other skaa
did, for they knew of his faults and his quirks. They knew him as a
man first, and as a god second. Perhaps the religions were the same
to Sazed. He knew them so well that he could see their flaws too
easily.
He did not
disparage the people who had followed the religions, but Sazed—so
far—had found only contradiction and hypocrisy in each religion
he studied. Divinity was supposed to be perfect. Divinity didn't let
its followers get slaughtered, and certainly didn't allow the world
to be destroyed by good men who were just trying to save it.
One of the
remaining ones would provide an answer. There had to be
truth he could discover. As his feelings of dark suffocation
threatened to overwhelm him, he fell to his studies, taking out the
next sheet in line and strapping it to the outside of the portfolio.
He would study it as he walked, carrying the portfolio with the sheet
on the bottom when he wasn't reading, thereby keeping the ash off of
it.
He'd find the
answers. He dared not think what he would do if there weren't any.
They eventually
passed into the Central Dominance, entering lands where men could
still struggle for food and life. Breeze and Allrianne stayed in the
carriage, but Sazed was glad to walk, even if it made his religions
difficult to study.
He wasn't certain
what to make of the cultivated fields. They passed scores of
them—Elend had packed as many people as possible into the
Central Dominance, then had ordered all of them to grow food for the
coming winter. Even those skaa who had lived in the cities were well
accustomed to hard work, and they quickly did as Elend ordered. Sazed
wasn't certain if the people understood just how dire their situation
was, or if they were simply happy to have someone tell them what to
do.
The roadside grew
heaped with tall piles of ash. Each day, the skaa workers had to
clear away the ash that had fallen during the night. This unending
task—along with the need to carry water to most of the new,
unirrigated fields—created a very labor-intensive system of
agriculture.
The plants did
grow, however. Sazed's troop passed field after field, each one
budding with brown plants. The sight should have brought him hope.
Yet, it was difficult to look upon the sprouting stalks and not feel
an even greater despair. They looked so weak and small beside the
massive piles of ash. Even forgetting the mists, how was Elend going
to feed an empire in these conditions? How long would it be before
there was simply too much ash to move? Skaa worked the fields, their
postures much as they had been during the days of the Lord Ruler.
What had really changed for them?
"Look at
them," a voice said. Sazed turned to see Captain Goradel walking
up beside him. Bald and rugged, the man had a good-natured
disposition—a trait common in the soldiers whom Ham promoted.
"I know,"
Sazed said quietly.
"Even with the
ash and the mist, seeing them gives me hope."
Sazed looked up
sharply. "Really?"
"Sure,"
Goradel said. "My family were farmers, Master Terrisman. We
lived in Luthadel, but worked the outer fields."
"But, you were
a soldier," Sazed said. "Weren't you the one who led Lady
Vin into the palace the night she killed the Lord Ruler?"
Goradel nodded.
"Actually, I led Lord Elend into the palace to rescue Lady Vin,
though she turned out to not need much help from us. Anyway, you're
right. I was a soldier in the Lord Ruler's palace—my parents
disowned me when I joined up. But, I just couldn't face working in
the fields my whole life."
"It is arduous
work."
"No, it wasn't
that," Goradel said. "It wasn't the labor, it was the . . .
hopelessness. I couldn't stand to work all day to grow something I
knew would belong to someone else. That's why I left the fields to
become a soldier, and that's why seeing these farms gives me hope."
Goradel nodded
toward a passing field. Some of the skaa looked up, then waved as
they saw Elend's banner. "These people," Goradel said,
"they work because they want to."
"They work
because if they don't, they will starve."
"Sure,"
Goradel said. "I guess you're right. But they're not working
because someone will beat them if they don't—they're working so
that their families and their friends won't die. There's a difference
in that, to a farmer. You can see it in the way they stand."
Sazed frowned as
they walked, but said nothing further.
"Anyway,
Master Terrisman," Goradel said, "I came to suggest that we
make a stop at Luthadel for supplies."
Sazed nodded. "I
suspected that we would do so. I, however, will need to leave you for
a few days as you go to Luthadel. Lord Breeze can take command. I
shall meet up with you on the northern highway."
Goradel nodded,
moving back to make the arrangements. He didn't ask why Sazed wanted
to leave the group, or what his destination was.
Several days later,
Sazed arrived—alone—at the Pits of Hathsin. There was
little to distinguish the area, now that the ash covered everything.
Sazed's feet kicked up clumps of it as he moved to the top of a hill.
He looked down on the valley that contained the Pits—the place
where Kelsier's wife had been murdered. The place where the Survivor
had been born.
It was now the home
of the Terris people.
There were few of
them remaining. They had never been a very large population, and the
coming of the mists and the difficult trek down to the Central
Dominance had claimed many lives. There were, perhaps, forty thousand
of them left. And a good many of the men were eunuchs, like Sazed.
Sazed moved down
the slope toward the valley. It had been a natural place to settle
the Terris people. During the days of the Lord Ruler, hundreds of
slaves had worked here, watched over by hundreds more soldiers. That
had ended when Kelsier had returned to the Pits and destroyed their
ability to produce atium. However, the Pits still had the buildings
and infrastructure that had supported them during their working days.
There was plenty of fresh water, and some shelter. The Terris people
had improved on this, building other structures across the valley,
making what was once the most terrifying of prison camps into a
pastoral group of villages.
Even as Sazed
walked down the hillside, he could see people brushing away the ash
from the ground, letting the natural plant life poke through to
provide grazing for the animals. The scrub that formed the dominant
foliage in the Central Dominance was a resilient, hardy group of
plants, and they were adapted to ash, and didn't need as much water
as farm crops. That meant that the Terris people actually had easier
lives than most. They were herdsman, as they had been even during the
centuries before the Lord Ruler's Ascension. A hearty, short-legged
breed of sheep mulled about on the hills, chewing down the uncovered
stalks of scrub.
The Terris
people, Sazed thought, living lives easier than most. What a
strange world it has become.
His approach soon
attracted attention. Children ran for their parents, and heads poked
from shacks. Sheep began to gather around Sazed as he walked, as if
hoping that he had come bearing treats of some sort.
Several aged men
rushed up the hillside, moving as quickly as their gnarled limbs
would allow. They—like Sazed—still wore their steward's
robes. And, like Sazed, they kept them cleaned of ash, showing the
colorful V-shaped patterns that ran down the fronts. Those patterns
had once indicated the noble house that the steward served.
"Lord Sazed!"
one of the men said eagerly.
"Your
Majesty!" said another.
Your Majesty.
"Please," Sazed said, raising his hands. "Do not
call me that."
The two aged
stewards glanced at each other. "Please, Master Keeper. Let us
get you something warm to eat."

Yes, the ash
was black. No, it should not have been. Most common ash has a dark
component, but is just as much gray or white as it is black.
Ash from the
ashmounts . . . it was different. Like the mists themselves, the ash
covering our land was not truly a natural thing. Perhaps it was the
influence of Ruin's power—as black as Preservation was white.
Or, perhaps it was simply the nature of the ashmounts, which were
designed and created specifically to blast ash and smoke into the
sky.





19
"GET
UP!"
Everything was
dark.
"Get up!"
Spook opened his
eyes. Everything seemed so dull, so muted. He could barely see. The
world was a dark blur. And . . . he felt numb. Dead. Why couldn't he
feel?
"Spook, you
need to get up!"
The voice, at
least, was clear. Yet, everything else felt muddy. He couldn't quite
manage to think. He blinked, groaning quietly. What was wrong with
him? His spectacles and cloth were gone. That should have left him
free to see, but everything was so dark.
He was out of tin.
There was nothing
burning in his stomach. The familiar flame, a comforting candle
within, was no longer there. It had been his companion for over a
year, always there. He'd feared what he was doing, but had never let
it die. And now it was gone.
That was why
everything seemed so dull. Was this really how other people lived?
How he used to live? He could barely see—the sharp, rich detail
he'd grown accustomed to was gone. The vibrant colors and crisp
lines. Instead, everything was bland and vague.
His ears felt
clogged. His nose . . . he couldn't smell the boards beneath him,
couldn't tell the species of wood by scent. He couldn't smell the
bodies that had passed. He couldn't feel the thumpings of people
moving about in other rooms.
And . . . he was
in a room. He shook his head, sitting up, trying to think.
Immediately, a pain in his shoulder made him gasp. The wound had not
been cared for. He remembered the sword piercing him near the
shoulder. That was not a wound one recovered from easily—indeed,
his left arm didn't seem to work right, one of the reasons he was
having so much trouble rising.
"You've lost a
lot of blood," the voice said. "You'll die soon, even if
the flames don't take you. Don't bother to look for the pouch of tin
at your belt—they took that."
"Flames?"
Spook croaked, blinking. How did people survive in a world that was
this dark?
"Can't you
feel them, Spook? They're near."
There was
a light nearby, down a hallway. Spook shook his head, trying to clear
his mind. I'm in a house, he thought. A nice one. A
nobleman's house.
And they're
burning it down.
This, finally, gave
him motivation to stand, though he immediately dropped again, his
body too weak—his mind too fuzzy—to keep him on his feet.
"Don't walk,"
the voice said. Where had he heard that voice before? He trusted it.
"Crawl," it said.
Spook did as
commanded, crawling forward.
"No, not
toward the flames! You have to get out, so you can punish
those who did this to you. Think, Spook!"
"Window,"
Spook croaked, turning to the side, crawling toward one of them.
"Boarded
shut," the voice said. "You saw this before, from the
outside. There's only one way to survive. You have to listen to me."
Spook nodded dully.
"Go out the
room's other door. Crawl toward the stairs leading to the second
floor."
Spook did so,
forcing himself to keep moving. His arms were so numb they felt like
weights tied to his shoulders. He'd been flaring tin so long that
normal senses just didn't seem to work for him anymore. He found the
stairs, though he was coughing by the time he got there. That would
be because of the smoke, a part of his mind told him. It was probably
a good thing he was crawling.
He could feel the
heat as he climbed. The flames seemed to be chasing him, claiming the
room behind him as he moved up the stairs, still dizzy. He reached
the top, then slipped on his own blood, slumping against the side of
the wall, groaning.
"Get up!"
the voice said.
Where have I
heard that voice before? he thought again. Why do I want to
do what it says? It was so close. He'd have it, if his mind
weren't so muddled. Yet, he obeyed, forcing himself to his hands and
knees again.
"Second room
on the left," the voice commanded.
Spook crawled
without thinking. Flames crept up the stairs, flickering across the
walls. His nose was weak, like his other senses, but he suspected
that the house had been soaked with oil. It made for a faster, more
dramatic burn that way.
"Stop. This is
the room."
Spook turned left,
crawling into the room. It was a study, well furnished. The thieves
in the city complained that ransacking places like this one wasn't
worth the effort. The Citizen forbade ostentation, and so expensive
furniture couldn't be sold, even on the black market. Nobody wanted
to be caught owning luxuries, lest they end up burning to death in
one of the Citizen's executions.
"Spook!"
Spook had heard of
those executions. He'd never seen one. He'd paid Durn to keep an eye
out for the next one. Spook's coin would get him advance warning, as
well as a good position to watch the building burn down. Plus, Durn
promised he had another tidbit, something Spook would be interested
in. Something worth the coin he'd paid.
Count the
skulls.
"Spook!"
Spook opened his
eyes. He'd fallen to the floor and begun to drift off. Flames were
already burning the ceiling. The building was dying. There was no way
Spook would get out, not in his current condition.
"Go to the
desk," the voice commanded.
"I'm dead,"
Spook whispered.
"No you're
not. Go to the desk."
Spook turned his
head, looking at the flames. A figure stood in them, a dark
silhouette. The walls dripped, bubbled, and hissed, their plaster and
paints blackening. Yet, this shadow of a person didn't seem to mind
the fire. That figure seemed familiar. Tall. Commanding.
"You . . .?"
Spook whispered.
"Go to the
desk!"
Spook rolled to his
knees. He crawled, dragging his useless arm, moving to the side of
the desk.
"Right
drawer."
Spook pulled it
open, then leaned against the side, slumping. Something was inside.
Vials?
He reached for them
eagerly. They were the kinds of vials used by Allomancers to store
metal shavings. With trembling fingers, Spook picked one up, then it
slipped free of his numb fingers. It shattered. He stared at the
liquid that had been inside—an alcohol solution that would keep
the metal flakes from corroding, as well as help the Allomancer drink
them down.
"Spook!"
the voice said.
Dully, Spook took
another vial. He worked off the stopper with his teeth, feeling the
fires blaze around him. The far wall was nearly gone. The fires crept
toward him.
He drank the
contents of the vial, then searched inside of himself, seeking tin.
But there was none. Spook cried out in despair, dropping the vial. It
had contained no tin. How would that have saved him anyway? It would
have made him feel the flames, and his wound, more acutely.
"Spook!"
the voice commanded. "Burn it!"
"There is no
tin!" Spook yelled.
"Not tin! The
man who owned this house was no Tineye!"
Not tin. Spook
blinked. Then—reaching within himself—he found something
completely unexpected. Something he'd never thought to ever see,
something that shouldn't have existed.
A new metal
reserve. He burned it.
His body flared
with strength. His trembling arms became steady. His weakness seemed
to flee, cast aside like darkness before the rising sun. He felt
tension and power, and his muscles grew taut with anticipation.
"Stand!"
His head snapped
up. He leaped to his feet, and this time the dizziness was gone. His
mind still felt numb, but something was clear to him. Only one metal
could have changed his body, making it strong enough to work despite
his terrible wound and blood loss.
Spook was burning
pewter.
The figure stood in
the flames, dark, hard to make out. "I've given you the blessing
of pewter, Spook," the voice said. "Use it to escape this
place. You can break through the boards on the far side of that
hallway, escape out onto the roof of the building nearby. The
soldiers won't be watching for you—they're too busy controlling
the fire so it doesn't spread."
Spook nodded. The
heat didn't bother him anymore. "Thank you."
The figure stepped
forward, becoming more than just a silhouette. Flames played against
the man's firm face, and Spook's suspicions were confirmed. There was
a reason he'd trusted that voice, a reason why he'd done what it had
said.
He'd do whatever
this man commanded.
"I didn't give
you pewter just so you could live, Spook," Kelsier said,
pointing. "I gave it to you so you could get revenge. Now, go!"

More than one
person reported feeling a sentient hatred in the mists. This is not
necessarily related to the mists killing people, however. For
most—even those it struck down—the mists seemed merely a
weather phenomenon, no more sentient or vengeful than a terrible
disease.
For some few,
however, there was more. Those it favored, it swirled around. Those
it was hostile to, it pulled away from. Some felt peace within it,
others felt hatred. It all came down to Ruin's subtle touch, and how
much one responded to his promptings.





20
TENSOON SAT
IN HIS CAGE.
The cage's very
existence was an insult. Kandra were not like men—even if he
were not imprisoned, TenSoon would not have run or tried to escape.
He had come willingly to his fate.
And yet, they
locked him up. He wasn't certain where they had gotten the cage—it
certainly wasn't something kandra normally would need. Still, the
Seconds had found it and erected it in one of the main caverns of the
Homeland. It was made of iron plates and hard steel bars with a
strong wire mesh stretched across all four faces to keep him from
reducing his body to base muscles and wriggling through. It was
another insult.
TenSoon sat inside,
naked on the cold iron floor. Had he accomplished anything other than
his own condemnation? Had his words in the Trustwarren been of any
value at all?
Outside his cage,
the caverns glowed with the light of cultivated mosses, and kandra
went about their duties. Many stopped, studying him. This was the
purpose of the long delay between his judgment and sentencing. The
Second Generationers didn't need weeks to ponder what they were going
to do to him. However, TenSoon had forced them to let him speak his
mind, and the Seconds wanted to make certain he was properly
punished. They put him on display, like some human in the stocks. In
all the history of the kandra people, no other had ever been treated
in such a way. His name would be a byword of shame for centuries.
But we won't
last centuries, he thought angrily. That was what my speech
was all about.
But, he hadn't
given it very well. How could he explain to the people what he felt?
That their traditions were coming to a focus, that their lives—which
had been stable for so long—were in drastic need of change?
What happened
above? Did Vin go to the Well of Ascension? What of Ruin, and
Preservation? The gods of the kandra people were at war again, and
the only ones who knew of them were pretending that nothing was
happening.
Outside his cage,
the other kandra lived their lives. Some trained the members of the
newer generations—he could see Elevenths moving along, little
more than blobs with some glistening bones. The transformation from
mistwraith to kandra was a difficult one. Once given a Blessing, the
mistwraith would lose most of its instincts as it gained sentience,
and would have to relearn how to form muscles and bodies. It was a
process that took many, many years.
Other adult kandra
went about food preparation. They would stew a mixture of algae and
fungi inside stone pits, not unlike the one in which TenSoon would
spend eternity. Despite his former hatred of mankind, TenSoon had
always found the opportunity to enjoy outside food—particularly
aged meat—a very tempting consolation for going out on a
Contract.
Now, he barely had
enough to drink, let alone enough to eat. He sighed, looking through
the bars at the vast cavern. The caves of the Homeland were enormous,
far too large for the kandra to fill. But, that was what many of his
people liked about them. After spending years in a Contract—serving
a master's whims, often for decades at a time—a place that
offered the option of solitude was quite precious.
Solitude,
TenSoon thought. I'll have plenty of that, soon enough.
Contemplating an eternity in prison made him a little less
annoyed with the people who came to gawk at him. They would be the
last of his people he ever saw. He recognized many of them. The
Fourths and Fifths came to spit at the ground before him, showing
their devotion to the Seconds. The Sixths and the Sevenths—who
made up the bulk of the Contract fillers—came to pity him and
shake their heads for a friend fallen. The Eighths and Ninths came
out of curiosity, amazed that one so aged could have fallen so far.
And then he saw a
particularly familiar face amidst the watching groups. TenSoon turned
aside, ashamed, as MeLaan approached, pain showing in those overly
large eyes of hers.
"TenSoon?"
a whisper soon came.
"Go away,
MeLaan," he said quietly, his back to the bars, which only let
him look out at another group of kandra, watching him from the other
side.
"TenSoon . .
." she repeated.
"You need not
see me like this, MeLaan. Please go."
"They
shouldn't be able to do this to you," she said, and he could
hear the anger in her voice. "You're nearly as old as they, and
far more wise."
"They are the
Second Generation," TenSoon said. "They are chosen by those
of the First. They lead us."
"They don't
have to lead us."
"MeLaan!"
he said, finally turning toward her. Most of the gawkers stayed back,
as if TenSoon's crime were a disease they could catch. MeLaan
crouched alone beside his cage, her True Body of spindly wooden bones
making her look unnaturally slim.
"You could
challenge them," MeLaan said quietly.
"What do you
think we are?" TenSoon asked. "Humans, with their
rebellions and upheavals? We are kandra. We are of Preservation. We
follow order."
"You still bow
before them?" MeLaan hissed, pressing her thin face up against
the bars. "After what you said—with what is happening
above?"
TenSoon paused.
"Above?"
"You were
right, TenSoon," she said. "Ash cloaks the land in a mantle
of black. The mists come during the day, killing both crops and
people. Men march to war. Ruin has returned."
TenSoon closed his
eyes. "They will do something," he finally said. "The
First Generation."
"They are
old," MeLaan said. "Old, forgetful, impotent."
TenSoon opened his
eyes. "You have changed much."
She smiled. "They
should never have given children of a new generation to be raised by
a Third. There are many of us, the younger ones, who would fight. The
Seconds can't rule forever. What can we do, TenSoon? How can we help
you?"
Oh, child, he
thought. You don't think that they know about you?
Those of the Second
Generation were not fools. They might be lazy, but they were old and
crafty—TenSoon understood this, for he knew each of them quite
well. They would have kandra listening, waiting to see what was said
at his cage. A kandra of the Fourth or Fifth Generation who had the
Blessing of Awareness could stand a distance away, and still hear
every word being spoken at his cage.
TenSoon was kandra.
He had returned to receive his punishment because that was right. It
was more than honor, more than Contract. It was who he was.
And yet, if the
things MeLaan had said were true . . .
Ruin has
returned.
"How can you
just sit here?" MeLaan said. "You're stronger than they
are, TenSoon."
TenSoon shook his
head. "I broke Contract, MeLaan."
"For a higher
good."
At least I
convinced her.
"Is it true,
TenSoon?" she asked very quietly.
"What?"
"OreSeur. He
had the Blessing of Potency. You must have inherited it, when you
killed him. Yet, they didn't find it on your body when they took you.
So, what did you do with it? Can I fetch it for you? Bring it, so
that you can fight?"
"I will not
fight my own people, MeLaan," TenSoon said. "I am kandra."
"Someone must
lead us!" she hissed.
That statement, at
least, was true. But, it wasn't TenSoon's right. Nor, really, was it
the right of the Second Generation—or even the First
Generation. It was the right of the one who had created them. That
one was dead. But, another had taken his place.
MeLaan was silent
for a time, still kneeling beside his cage. Perhaps she waited for
him to offer encouragement, or perhaps to become the leader she
sought. He didn't speak.
"So, you just
came to die," she finally said.
"To explain
what I've discovered. What I've felt."
"And then
what? You come, proclaim dread news, then leave us to solve the
problems on our own?"
"That's not
fair, MeLaan," he said. "I came to be the best kandra I
know how."
"Then fight!"
He shook his head.
"It's true
then," she said. "The others of my generation, they said
that you were broken by that last master of yours. The man Zane."
"He did not
break me," TenSoon said.
"Oh?"
MeLaan said. "And why did you return to the Homeland in that . .
. body you were using?"
"The dog's
bones?" TenSoon said. "Those weren't given to me by Zane,
but by Vin."
"So she
broke you."
TenSoon exhaled
quietly. How could he explain? On one hand, it seemed ironic to him
that MeLaan—who intentionally wore a True Body that was
inhuman—would find his use of a dog's body so distasteful. Yet,
he could understand. It had taken him quite some time to appreciate
the advantages of those bones.
He paused.
But, no. He had not
come to bring revolution. He had come to explain, to serve the
interests of his people. He would do that by accepting his
punishment, as a kandra should.
And yet . . .
There was a chance.
A slim one. He wasn't even certain he wanted to escape, but if there
was an opportunity . . . "Those bones I wore," TenSoon
found himself saying. "You know where they are?"
MeLaan frowned.
"No. Why would you want them?"
TenSoon shook his
head. "I don't," he said, choosing his words carefully.
"They were disgraceful! I was made to wear them for over a year,
forced into the humiliating role of a dog. I would have discarded
them, but I had no corpse to ingest and take, so I had to return here
wearing that horrid body."
"You're
avoiding the real issue, TenSoon."
"There is no
real issue, MeLaan," he said, turning away from her. Whether or
not his plan worked, he didn't want the Seconds punishing her for
associating with him. "I will not rebel against my people.
Please, if you truly wish to help me, just let me be."
MeLaan hissed
quietly, and he heard her stand. "You were once the greatest of
us."
TenSoon sighed as
she left. No, MeLaan. I was never great. Up until recently, I was
the most orthodox of my generation, a conservative distinguished only
by his hatred of humans. Now, I've become the greatest criminal in
the history of our people, but I did it mostly by accident.
That isn't
greatness. That's just foolishness.

It should be no
surprise that Elend became such a powerful Allomancer. It is a
well-documented fact—though that documentation wasn't available
to most—that Allomancers were much stronger during the early
days of the Final Empire.
In those days,
an Allomancer didn't need duralumin to take control of a kandra or
koloss. A simple Push or Pull on the emotions was enough. In fact,
this ability was one of the main reasons that the kandra devised
their Contracts with the humans—for, at that time, not only
Mistborn, but Soothers and Rioters could take control of them at the
merest of whims.





21
DEMOUX
SURVIVED.
He was one of the
larger group, the fifteen percent who grew sick, but did not die. Vin
sat atop the cabin of her narrowboat, arm resting on a wooden ledge,
idly fingering her mother's earring—which, as always, she wore
in her ear. Koloss brutes trudged along the towpath, dragging the
barges and boats down the canal. Many of the barges still carried
supplies—tents, foodstuffs, pure water. Several had been
emptied, however, their contents carried on the backs of the
surviving soldiers, making room for the wounded.
Vin turned away
from the barges, looking toward the front of the narrowboat. Elend
stood at the prow, as usual, staring west. He did not brood. He
looked like a king, standing straight-backed, staring determinedly
toward his goal. He looked so different now from the man he had once
been, with his full beard, his longer hair, his uniforms that had
been scrubbed white. They were growing worn. Not ragged . . . they
were still clean and sharp, as white as things could get in the
current state of the world. They were just no longer new. They were
the uniforms of a man who had been at war for two years straight.
Vin knew him well
enough to sense that all was not well. However, she also knew him
well enough to sense that he didn't want to talk about it for the
moment.
She stood and
stepped down, burning pewter unconsciously to heighten her balance.
She slid a book off a bench beside the boat's edge, and settled down
quietly. Elend would talk to her eventually—he always did. For
the moment, she had something else to engage her.
She opened the book
to the marked page and reread a particular paragraph. The
Deepness must be destroyed, the words said. I have seen it,
and I have felt it. This name we give it is too weak a word, I think.
Yes, it is deep and unfathomable, but it is also terrible. Many do
not realize that it is sentient, but I have sensed its mind, such as
it is, the few times I have confronted it directly.
She eyed the page
for a moment, sitting back on her bench. Beside her, the canal waters
passed, covered with a froth of floating ash.
The book was
Alendi's logbook. It had been written a thousand years before by a
man who had thought himself to be the Hero of Ages. Alendi hadn't
completed his quest; he had been killed by one of his
servants—Rashek—who had then taken the power at the Well
of Ascension and become the Lord Ruler.
Alendi's story was
frighteningly close to Vin's own. She had also assumed herself to be
the Hero of Ages. She had traveled to the Well, and had been
betrayed. She, however, hadn't been betrayed by one of her
servants—but instead by the force imprisoned within the Well.
That force was, she assumed, behind the prophecies about the Hero of
Ages in the first place.
Why do I keep
coming back to this paragraph? she thought, eyeing it again.
Perhaps it was because of what Human had said to her—that the
mists hated her. She had felt that hatred herself, and it appeared
that Alendi had felt the same thing.
But, could she even
trust the logbook's words? The force she had released, the thing she
called Ruin, had proven that it could change things in the world.
Small things, yet important ones. Like the text of a book, which was
why Elend's officers were now instructed to send all messages via
memorized words or letters etched into metal.
Regardless, if
there had been any clues to be gained by reading the logbook, Ruin
would have removed them long ago. Vin felt as if she'd been led by
the nose for the last three years, pulled by invisible strings. She
had thought she was having revelations and making great discoveries,
but all she'd really been doing was following Ruin's bidding.
Yet, Ruin is
not omnipotent , Vin thought. If it were, there would have
been no fight. It wouldn't have needed to trick me into releasing it.
It cannot know
my thoughts. . . .
Even that knowledge
was frustrating. What good were her thoughts? Always before, she'd
had Sazed, Elend, or TenSoon to talk with about problems like this.
This wasn't a task for Vin; she was no scholar. Yet, Sazed had turned
his back on his studies, TenSoon had returned to his people, and
Elend was far too busy lately to worry about anything but his army
and its politics. That left Vin. And she still found reading and
scholarship to be stuffy and boring.
Yet, she was also
becoming more and more comfortable with the idea of doing what was
necessary, even if she found it distasteful. She was no longer just
her own person. She belonged to the New Empire. She had been its
knife—now it was time to try a different role.
I have to do
it, she thought, sitting in the red sunlight. There is a
puzzle here —something to be solved. What was it
Kelsier liked to say?
There's always
another secret.
She remembered
Kelsier, standing boldly before a small group of thieves, proclaiming
that they would overthrow the Lord Ruler and free the empire. We're
thieves, he'd said. And we're extraordinarily good ones. We
can rob the unrobbable and fool the unfoolable. We know how to take
an incredibly large task and break it down to manageable pieces, then
deal with each of those pieces.
That day, when he'd
written up the team's goals and plans on a small board, Vin had been
amazed by how possible he had made an impossible task seem. That day,
a little bit of her had begun to believe that Kelsier could overthrow
the Final Empire.
All right, Vin
thought. I'll begin like Kelsier did, by listing the things that
I know for certain.
There had
been a power at the Well of Ascension, so that much about the stories
was true. There had also been something alive, imprisoned in or near
the Well. It had tricked Vin into using the power to destroy its
bonds. Maybe she could have used that power to destroy Ruin instead,
but she'd given it up.
She sat
thoughtfully, tapping her finger against the back of the logbook. She
could still remember wisps of what it had felt like to hold that
power. It had awed her, yet at the same time felt natural and right.
In fact, while she held it, everything had felt natural. The
workings of the world, the ways of men . . . it was like the power
had been more than simple capability. It had been understanding as
well.
That was a tangent.
She needed to focus on what she knew before she could philosophize on
what she needed to do. The power was real, and Ruin was real. Ruin
had retained some ability to change the world while confined—Sazed
had confirmed that his texts had been altered to suit Ruin's purpose.
Now Ruin was free, and Vin assumed that it was behind the violent
mist killings and the falling ash.
Though ,
she reminded herself, I don't know either of those things for
certain. What did she know about Ruin? She had touched it, felt
it, in that moment she had released it. It had a need to destroy, yet
it was not a force of simple chaos. It didn't act randomly. It
planned and thought. And, it didn't seem able to do anything it
wanted. Almost as if it followed specific rules . . .
She paused.
"Elend?" she called.
The emperor turned
from his place beside the prow.
"What is the
first rule of Allomancy?" Vin asked. "The first thing I
taught you?"
"Consequence,"
Elend said. "Every action has consequences. When you Push on
something heavy, it will push you back. If you Push on something
light, it will fly away."
It was the first
lesson that Kelsier had taught Vin, as well as—she assumed—the
first lesson his master had taught him.
"It's a good
rule," Elend said, turning back to his contemplation of the
horizon. "It works for all things in life. If you throw
something into the air, it will come back down. If you bring an army
into a man's kingdom, he will react . . ."
Consequence ,
she thought, frowning. Like things falling back when thrown into
the sky. That's what Ruin's actions feel like to me. Consequences.
Perhaps it was a remnant of touching the power, or perhaps just
some rationalization her unconscious mind was giving her. Yet, she
felt a logic to Ruin. She didn't understand that logic, but she could
recognize it.
Elend turned back
toward her. "That's why I like Allomancy, actually. Or, at
least, the theory of it. The skaa whisper about it, call it mystical,
but it's really quite rational. You can tell what an Allomantic Push
is going to do as certainly as you can tell what will happen when you
drop a rock off the side of the boat. For every Push, there is a
Pull. There are no exceptions. It makes simple, logical sense—unlike
the ways of men, which are filled with flaws, irregularities, and
double meanings. Allomancy is a thing of nature."
A thing of
nature.
For every Push,
there is a Pull. A consequence.
"That's
important," Vin whispered.
"What?"
A consequence.
The thing she had
felt at the Well of Ascension had been a thing of destruction, like
Alendi described in his logbook. But, it hadn't been a creature, not
like a person. It had been a force—a thinking force, but a
force nonetheless. And forces had rules. Allomancy, weather, even the
pull of the ground. The world was a place that made sense. A place of
logic. Every Push had a Pull. Every force had a consequence.
She had to
discover, then, the laws relating to the thing she was fighting. That
would tell her how to beat it.
"Vin?"
Elend asked, studying her face.
Vin looked away.
"It's nothing, Elend. Nothing I can speak of, at least."
He watched her for
a moment. He thinks that you're plotting against him, Reen
whispered from the back of her mind. Fortunately, the days when she
had listened to Reen's words were long past. Indeed, as she watched
Elend, she saw him nod slowly, and accept her explanation. He turned
back to his own contemplations.
Vin rose, walking
forward, laying a hand on his arm. He sighed, raising the arm and
wrapping it around her shoulders, pulling her close. That arm, once
the weak arm of a scholar, was now muscular and firm.
"What are you
thinking about?" Vin asked.
"You know,"
Elend said.
"It was
necessary, Elend. The soldiers had to get exposed to the mists
eventually."
"Yes,"
Elend said. "But there's something more, Vin. I fear I'm
becoming like him."
"Who?"
"The Lord
Ruler."
Vin snorted
quietly, pulling closer to him.
"This is
something he would have done," Elend said. "Sacrificing his
own men for a tactical advantage."
"You explained
this to Ham," Vin said. "We can't afford to waste time."
"It's still
ruthless," Elend said. "The problem isn't that those men
died, it's that I was so willing to make it happen. I feel . . .
brutal, Vin. How far will I go to see my goals achieved? I'm
marching on another man's kingdom to take it from him."
"For the
greater good."
"That has been
the excuse of tyrants throughout all time. I know it. Yet, I press
on. This is why I didn't want to be emperor. This is why I
let Penrod take my throne from me back during the siege. I didn't
want to be the kind of leader who had to do things like this. I want
to protect, not besiege and kill! But, is there any other way?
Everything I do seems like it must be done. Like exposing my
own men in the mists. Like marching on Fadrex City. We have to get to
that storehouse—it's the only lead we have that could even
possibly give us some clue as to what we're supposed to do! It all
makes such sense. Ruthless, brutal sense."
Ruthlessness is
the very most practical of emotions, Reen's voice whispered. She
ignored it. "You've been listening to Cett too much."
"Perhaps,"
Elend said. "Yet, his is a logic I find difficult to ignore. I
grew up as an idealist, Vin—we both know that's true. Cett
provides a kind of balance. The things he says are much like what
Tindwyl used to say."
He paused, shaking
his head. "Just a short time ago, I was talking with Cett about
Allomantic Snapping. Do you know what the noble houses did to ensure
that they found the Allomancers among their children?"
"They had them
beaten," Vin whispered. A person's Allomantic powers were always
latent until something traumatic brought them out. A person had to be
brought to the brink of death and survive—only then would their
powers be awakened. It was called Snapping.
Elend nodded. "It
was one of the great, dirty secrets of so-called noble life. Families
often lost children to the beatings—those beatings had to be
brutal for them to evoke Allomantic abilities. Each house was
different, but they generally specified an age before adolescence.
When a boy or girl hit that age, they were taken and beaten near to
death."
Vin shivered
slightly.
"I vividly
remember mine," Elend said. "Father didn't beat me himself,
but he did watch. The saddest thing about the beatings was that most
of them were pointless. Only a handful of children, even noble
children, became Allomancers. I didn't. I was beaten for nothing."
"You stopped
those beatings, Elend," Vin said softly. He had drafted a bill
soon after becoming king. A person could choose to undergo a
supervised beating when they came of age, but Elend had stopped it
from happening to children.
"And I was
wrong," Elend said softly.
Vin looked up.
"Allomancers
are our most powerful resource, Vin," Elend said, looking out
over the marching soldiers. "Cett lost his kingdom, nearly his
life, because he couldn't marshal enough Allomancers to protect him.
And I made it illegal to search out Allomancers in my population."
"Elend, you
stopped the beating of children."
"And if those
beatings could save lives?" Elend asked. "Like exposing my
soldiers could save lives? What about Kelsier? He only gained his
powers as a Mistborn after he was trapped in the Pits of
Hathsin. What would have happened if he'd been beaten properly as a
child? He would always have been Mistborn. He could have saved his
wife."
"And then
wouldn't have had the courage or motivation to overthrow the Final
Empire."
"And is what
we have any better?" Elend asked. "The longer I've held
this throne, Vin, the more I've come to realize that some of the
things the Lord Ruler did weren't evil, but simply effective. Right
or wrong, he maintained order in his kingdom."
Vin looked up,
catching his eyes, forcing him to look down at her. "I don't
like this hardness in you, Elend."
He looked out over
the blackened canal waters. "It doesn't control me, Vin. I don't
agree with most of the things the Lord Ruler did. I'm just coming to
understand him—and that understanding worries me." She saw
questions in his eyes, but also strengths. He looked down and met her
eyes. "I can hold this throne only because I know that at one
point, I was willing to give it up in the name of what was right. If
I ever lose that, Vin, you need to tell me. All right?"
Vin nodded.
Elend looked back
at the horizon again. What is it he hopes to see? Vin
thought.
"There has to
be a balance, Vin," he said. "Somehow, we'll find it. The
balance between whom we wish to be and whom we need to be." He
sighed. "But for now," he said, nodding to the side, "we
simply have to be satisfied with who we are."
Vin glanced to the
side as a small courier skiff from one of the other narrowboats
pulled up alongside theirs. A man in simple brown robes stood upon
it. He wore large spectacles, as if attempting to obscure the
intricate Ministry tattoos around his eyes, and he was smiling
happily.
Vin smiled herself.
Once, she had thought that a happy obligator was always a
bad sign. That was before she'd known Noorden. Even during the days
of the Lord Ruler, the contented scholar had probably lived most of
his life in his own little world. He provided a strange proof that
even in the confines of what had once been—in her opinion—the
most evil organization in the empire, one could find good men.
"Your
Excellency," Noorden said, stepping off of the skiff and bowing.
A couple of assistant scribes joined him on the deck, lugging books
and ledgers.
"Noorden,"
Elend said, joining the man on the foredeck. Vin followed. "You
have done the counts I asked?"
"Yes, Your
Excellency," Noorden said as an aide opened up a ledger on a
pile of boxes. "I must say, this was a difficult task, what with
the army moving about and the like."
"I'm certain
you were thorough as always, Noorden," Elend said. He glanced at
the ledger, which seemed to make sense to him, though all Vin saw was
a bunch of random numbers.
"What's it
say?" she asked.
"It lists the
number of sick and dead," Elend said. "Of our thirty-eight
thousand, nearly six thousand were taken by the sickness. We lost
about five hundred and fifty."
"Including one
of my own scribes," Noorden said, shaking his head.
Vin frowned. Not at
the death, at something else, something itching at her mind . . .
"Fewer dead
than expected," Elend said, pulling thoughtfully at his beard.
"Yes, Your
Excellency," Noorden said. "I guess these soldier types are
more rugged than the average skaa population. The sickness, whatever
it is, didn't strike them as hard."
"How do you
know?" Vin asked, looking up. "How do you know how many
should have died?"
"Previous
experience, my lady," Noorden said in his chatty way. "We've
been tracking these deaths with some interest. Since the disease is
new, we're trying to determine exactly what causes it. Perhaps that
will lead us to a way to treat it. I've had my scribes reading what
we can, trying to find clues of other diseases like this. It seems a
little like the shakewelts, though that's usually brought on by—"
"Noorden,"
Vin said, frowning. "You have figures then? Exact numbers?"
"That's what
His Excellency asked for, my lady."
"How many fell
sick to the disease?" Vin asked. "Exactly?"
"Well, let me
see . . ." Noorden said, shooing his scribe away and checking
the ledger. "Five thousand two hundred and forty-three."
"What
percentage of the soldiers is that?" Vin asked.
Noorden paused,
then waved over a scribe and did some calculations. "About
thirteen and a half percent, my lady," he finally said,
adjusting his spectacles.
Vin frowned. "Did
you include the men who died in your calculations?"
"Actually,
no," Noorden said.
"And which
total did you use?" Vin asked. "The total number of men in
the army, or the total number who hadn't been in the mists before?"
"The first."
"Do you have a
count for the second number?" Vin asked.
"Yes, my
lady," Noorden said. "The emperor wanted an accurate count
of which soldiers would be affected."
"Use that
number instead," Vin said, glancing at Elend. He seemed
interested.
"What is this
about, Vin?" he asked as Noorden and his men worked.
"I'm . . . not
sure," Vin said.
"Numbers are
important for generalizations," Elend said. "But I don't
see how . . ." He trailed off as Noorden looked up from his
calculations, then cocked his head, saying something softly to
himself.
"What?"
Vin asked.
"I'm sorry, my
lady," Noorden said. "I was just a bit surprised. The
calculation came out to be exact—precisely sixteen percent of
the soldiers fell sick. To the man."
"A
coincidence, Noorden," Elend said. "It isn't that
remarkable for calculations to come out exact."
Ash blew across the
deck. "No," Noorden said, "no, you are right, Your
Excellency. A simple coincidence."
"Check your
ledgers," Vin said. "Find percentages based on other groups
of people who have caught this disease."
"Vin,"
Elend said, "I'm no statistician, but I have worked with numbers
in my research. Sometimes, natural phenomena produce seemingly odd
results, but the chaos of statistics actually results in
normalization. It might appear strange that our numbers broke down to
an exact percentage, but that's just the way that statistics work."
"Sixteen,"
Noorden said. He looked up. "Another exact percentage."
Elend frowned,
stepping over to the ledger.
"This third
one here isn't exact," Noorden said, "but that's only
because the base number isn't a multiple of twenty-five. A fraction
of a person can't really become sick, after all. Yet, the sickness in
this population here is within a single person of being exactly
sixteen percent."
Elend knelt down,
heedless of the ash that had dusted the deck since it had last been
swept. Vin looked over his shoulder, scanning the numbers.
"It doesn't
matter how old the average member of the population is," Noorden
said, scribbling. "Nor does it matter where they live. Each one
shows the exact same percentage of people falling sick."
"How could we
have not noticed this before?" Elend asked.
"Well, we did,
after a fashion," Noorden said. "We knew that about
four in twenty-five caught the sickness. However, I hadn't realized
how exact the numbers were. This is indeed odd, Your Excellency. I
know of no other disease that works this way. Look, here's an entry
where a hundred scouts were sent into the mists, and precisely
sixteen of them fell sick!"
Elend looked
troubled.
"What?"
Vin asked.
"This is
wrong, Vin," Elend said. "Very wrong."
"It's like the
chaos of normal random statistics has broken down," Noorden
said. "A population should never react this
precisely—there should be a curve of probability, with smaller
populations reflecting the expected percentages least accurately."
"At the very
least," Elend said, "the sickness should affect the elderly
in different ratios from the healthy."
"In a way, it
does," Noorden said as one of his assistants handed him a paper
with further calculations. "The deaths respond that
way, as we would expect. But, the total number who fall sick is
always sixteen percent! We've been paying so much attention to how
many died, we didn't notice how unnatural the percentages of those
stricken were."
Elend stood. "Check
on this, Noorden," he said, gesturing toward the ledger. "Do
interviews, make certain the data hasn't been changed by Ruin, and
find out if this trend holds. We can't jump to conclusions with only
four or five examples. It could all just be a large coincidence."
"Yes, Your
Excellency," Noorden said, looking a bit shaken. "But . . .
what if it's not a coincidence? What does it mean?"
"I don't
know," Elend said.
It means
consequence, Vin thought. It means that there are laws, even
if we don't understand them.
Sixteen. Why
sixteen percent?

The beads of
metal found at the Well —beads that made men into
Mistborn —were the reason why Allomancers used to be
more powerful. Those first Mistborn were as Elend Venture became
—possessing a primal power, which was then passed down
through the lines of the nobility, weakening a bit with each
generation.
The Lord Ruler
was one of these ancient Allomancers, his power pure and
unadulterated by time and breeding. That is part of why he was so
mighty compared to other Mistborn —though, admittedly,
his ability to mix Feruchemy and Allomancy was what produced many of
his most spectacular abilities. Still, it is interesting to me that
one of his "divine" powers—his essential Allomantic
strength—was something every one of the original nine
Allomancers possessed.





22
SAZED SAT
IN ONE OF THE NICER BUILDINGS at the Pits of Hathsin—a
former guardhouse—holding a mug of hot tea. The Terris elders
sat in chairs before him, a small stove providing warmth. On the next
day, Sazed would have to leave to catch up with Goradel and Breeze,
who would be well on their way to Urteau by now.
The sunlight was
dimming. The mists had already come, and they hung just outside the
glass window. Sazed could just barely make out depressions in the
dark ground outside—cracks, in the earth. There were dozens of
the cracks; the Terris people had built fences to mark them. Only a
few years ago, before Kelsier had destroyed the atium crystals, men
had been forced to crawl down into those cracks, seeking small geodes
which had beads of atium at their centers.
Each slave who
hadn't been able to find at least one geode a week had been executed.
There were likely still hundreds, perhaps thousands, of corpses
pinned beneath the ground, lost in deep caverns, dead without anyone
knowing or caring.
What a terrible
place this was, Sazed thought, turning away from the window as a
young Terriswoman closed the shutters. Before him on the table were
several ledgers which showed the resources, expenditures, and needs
of the Terris people.
"I believe I
suggested keeping these figures in metal," Sazed said.
"Yes, Master
Keeper," said one of the elderly stewards. "We copy the
important figures into a sheet of metal each evening, then check them
weekly against the ledgers to make certain nothing has changed."
"That is
well," Sazed said, picking through one of the ledgers, sitting
in his lap. "And sanitation? Have you addressed those issues
since my last visit?"
"Yes, Master
Keeper," said another man. "We have prepared many more
latrines, as you commanded—though we do not need them."
"There may be
refugees," Sazed said. "I wish for you to be able to care
for a larger population, should it become necessary. But, please.
These are only suggestions, not commands. I claim no authority over
you."
The group of
stewards shared glances. Sazed had been busy during his time with
them, which had kept him from dwelling on his melancholy thoughts.
He'd made sure they had enough supplies, that they kept a good
communication with Penrod in Luthadel, and that they had a system in
place for settling disputes among themselves.
"Master
Keeper," one of the elders finally said. "How long will you
be staying?"
"I must leave
in the morning, I fear," Sazed said. "I came simply to
check on your needs. This is a difficult time to live, and you could
be easily forgotten by those in Luthadel, I think."
"We are well,
Master Keeper," said one of the others. He was the youngest of
the elders, and he was only a few years younger than Sazed. Most of
the men here were far older—and far wiser—than he. That
they should look to him seemed wrong.
"Will you not
reconsider your place with us, Master Keeper?" asked another.
"We want not for food or for land. Yet, what we do lack is a
leader."
"The Terris
people were oppressed long enough, I think," Sazed said. "You
have no need for another tyrant king."
"Not a
tyrant," one said. "One of our own."
"The Lord
Ruler was one of our own," Sazed said quietly,
The group of men
looked down. That the Lord Ruler had proven to be Terris was a shame
to all of their people.
"We need
someone to guide us," one of the men said. "Even during the
days of the Lord Ruler, he was not our leader. We looked to the
Keeper Synod."
The Keeper
Synod—the clandestine leaders of Sazed's sect. They had led the
Terris people for centuries, secretly working to make certain that
Feruchemy continued, despite the Lord Ruler's attempts to breed the
power out of the people.
"Master
Keeper," said Master Vedlew, senior of the elders.
"Yes, Master
Vedlew?"
"You do not
wear your copperminds."
Sazed looked down.
He hadn't realized it was noticeable that, beneath his robes, he
wasn't wearing the metal bracers. "They are in my pack."
"It seems odd,
to me," Vedlew said, "that you should work so hard during
the Lord Ruler's time, always wearing your metalminds in secret,
despite the danger. Yet, now that you are free to do as you wish, you
carry them in your pack."
Sazed shook his
head. "I cannot be the man you wish me to be. Not right now."
"You are a
Keeper."
"I was the
lowest of them," Sazed said. "A rebel and a reject. They
cast me from their presence. The last time I left Tathingdwen, I did
so in disgrace. The common people cursed me in the quiet of their
homes."
"Now they
bless you, Master Sazed," said one of the men.
"I do not
deserve those blessings."
"Deserve them
or not, you are all we have left."
"Then we are a
sorrier people than we may appear."
The room fell
silent.
"There was
another reason why I came here, Master Vedlew," Sazed said,
looking up. "Tell me, have any of your people died recently in .
. . odd circumstances?"
"Of what do
you speak?" the aged Terrisman asked.
"Mist deaths,"
Sazed said. "Men who are killed by simply going out into the
mists during the day."
"That is a
tale of the skaa," one of the other men scoffed. "The mists
are not dangerous."
"Indeed,"
Sazed said carefully. "Do you send your people out to work in
them during the daylight hours, when the mists have not yet retreated
for the day?"
"Of course we
do," said the younger Terrisman. "Why, it would be foolish
to let those hours of work pass."
Sazed found it
difficult not to let his curiosity work on that fact. Terrismen
weren't killed by the daymists.
What was the
connection?
He tried to summon
the mental energy to think on the issue, but he felt traitorously
apathetic. He just wanted to hide somewhere where nobody would expect
anything of him. Where he wouldn't have to solve the problems of the
world, or even deal with his own religious crisis.
He almost did just
that. And yet, a little part of him—a spark from before—refused
to simply give up. He would at least continue his research, and would
do what Elend and Vin asked of him. It wasn't all he could
do, and it wouldn't satisfy the Terrismen who sat here, looking at
him with needful expressions.
But, for the
moment, it was all Sazed could offer. To stay at the Pits would be to
surrender, he knew. He needed to keep moving, keep working.
"I'm sorry,"
he said to the men, setting aside the ledger. "But this is how
it must be."

During the
early days of Kelsier's original plan, I remember how much he
confused us all with his mysterious "Eleventh Metal." He
claimed that there were legends of a mystical metal that would let
one slay the Lord Ruler —and that Kelsier himself had
located that metal through intense research.
Nobody really
knew what Kelsier did in the years between his escape from the Pits
of Hathsin and his return to Luthadel. When pressed, he simply said
that he had been in "the West." Somehow in his wanderings
he discovered stories that no Keeper had ever heard. Most of the crew
didn't know what to make of the legends he spoke of. This might have
been the first seed that made even his oldest friends begin to
question his leadership.





23
IN THE
EASTERN LANDS, near the wastelands of grit and sand, a young
boy fell to the ground inside a skaa shack. It was many years before
the Collapse, and the Lord Ruler still lived. Not that the boy knew
of such things. He was a dirty, ragged thing—like most other
skaa children in the Final Empire. Too young to be put to work in the
mines, he spent his days ducking away from his mother's care and
running about with the packs of children who foraged in the dry,
dusty streets.
Spook hadn't been
that boy for some ten years. In a way, he was aware that he was
delusional—that the fever of his wounds was causing him to come
in and out of consciousness, dreams of the past filling his mind. He
let them run. Staying focused required too much energy.
And so, he
remembered what it felt like as he hit the ground. A large man—all
men were large compared with Spook—stood over him, skin dirtied
with the dust and grime of a miner. The man spat on the dirty floor
beside Spook, then turned to the other skaa in the room. There were
many. One was crying, the tears leaving lines of cleanliness on her
cheeks, washing away the dust.
"All right,"
the large man said. "We have him. Now what?"
The people glanced
at each other. One quietly closed the shack's door, shutting out the
red sunlight.
"There's only
one thing to be done," another man said. "We turn him in."
Spook looked up. He
met the eyes of the crying woman. She looked away. "Wasing the
where of what?" Spook demanded.
The large man spat
again, setting a boot against Spook's neck, pushing him back down
against the rough wood. "You shouldn't have let him run around
with those street gangs, Margel. Damn boy is barely coherent now."
"What happens
if we give him up?" asked one of the other men. "I mean,
what if they decide that we're like him? They could have us
executed! I've seen it before. You turn someone in, and those . . .
things come searching for everyone that knew him."
"Problems like
his run in the family, they do," another man said.
The room grew
quiet. They all knew about Spook's family.
"They'll kill
us," said the frightened man. "You know they will! I've
seen them, seen them with those spikes in their eyes. Spirits of
death, they are."
"We can't just
let him run about," another man said. "They'll discover
what he is."
"There's only
one thing to be done," the large man said, pressing down on
Spook's neck even harder.
The room's
occupants—the ones Spook could see—nodded solemnly. They
couldn't turn him in. They couldn't let him go. But, nobody would
miss a skaa urchin. No Inquisitor or obligator would ask twice about
a dead child found in the streets. Skaa died all the time.
That was the way of
the Final Empire.
"Father,"
Spook whispered.
The heel came down
harder. "You're not my son! My son went into the mists and never
came out. You must be a mistwraith."
Spook tried to
object, but his chest was pressed down too tight. He couldn't
breathe, let alone speak. The room started to grow black. And yet,
his ears—supernaturally sensitive, enhanced by powers he barely
understood—heard something.
Coins.
The pressure on his
neck grew weaker. He was able to gasp for breath, his vision
returning. And there, spilled on the ground before him, was a
scattering of beautiful copper coins. Skaa weren't paid for their
work—the miners were given goods instead, barely enough to
survive on. Yet, Spook had seen coins occasionally passing between
noble hands. He'd once known a boy who had found a coin, lost in the
dusty grime of the street.
A larger boy had
killed him for it. Then, a nobleman had killed that boy when he'd
tried to spend it. It seemed to Spook that no skaa would want
coins—they were far too valuable, and far too dangerous. And
yet, every eye in the room stared at that spilled bag of wealth.
"The bag in
exchange for the boy," a voice said. Bodies parted to where a
man sat at a table at the back of the room. He wasn't looking at
Spook. He just sat, quietly spooning gruel into his mouth. His face
was gnarled and twisted, like leather that had been sitting in the
sun for far too long. "Well?" the gnarled man said between
bites.
"Where did you
get money like this?" Spook's father demanded.
"None of your
business."
"We can't let
the boy go," one of the skaa said. "He'll betray us! Once
they catch him, he'll tell them that we knew!"
"They won't
catch him," the gnarled man said, taking another bite of food.
"He'll be with me, in Luthadel. Besides, if you don't
let him go, I'll just go ahead and tell the obligators about you
all." He paused, lowering his spoon, glancing at the crowd with
a crusty look. "Unless you're going to kill me too."
Spook's father
finally took his heel off Spook's neck as he stepped toward the
gnarled stranger. However, Spook's mother grabbed her husband's arm.
"Don't, Jedal," she said softly—but not too softly
for Spook's enhanced ears. "He'll kill you."
"He's a
traitor," Spook's father spat. "Servant in the Lord Ruler's
army."
"He brought us
coins. Surely taking his money is better than simply killing the
boy."
Spook's father
looked down at the woman. "You did this! You sent for
your brother. You knew he'd want to take the boy!"
Spook's mother
turned away.
The gnarled man
finally set down his spoon, then stood. People backed away from his
chair in apprehension. He walked with a pronounced limp as he crossed
the room.
"Come on,
boy," he said, not looking at Spook as he opened the door.
Spook rose slowly,
tentatively. He glanced at his mother and father as he backed away.
Jedal stooped down, finally gathering up the coins. Margel met
Spook's eyes, then turned away. This is all I can give you,
her posture seemed to say.
Spook turned,
rubbing his neck, and rushed into the hot red sunlight after the
stranger. The older man hobbled along, walking with a cane. He
glanced at Spook as he walked.
"You have a
name, boy?"
Spook opened his
mouth, then stopped. His old name didn't seem like it would do any
more. "Lestibournes," he finally said.
The old man didn't
bat an eye. Later, Kelsier would decide that Lestibournes was too
difficult to say, and name him "Spook" instead. Spook never
did figure out whether or not Clubs knew how to speak Eastern street
slang. Even if he did, Spook doubted that he'd understand the
reference.
Lestibournes.
Lefting I'm born.
Street slang for
"I've been abandoned."

I now believe
that Kelsier's stories, legends, and prophecies about the "Eleventh
Metal" were fabricated by Ruin. Kelsier was looking for a way to
kill the Lord Ruler, and Ruin—ever subtle—provided a way.
That secret was
indeed crucial. Kelsier's Eleventh Metal provided the very clue we
needed to defeat the Lord Ruler. However, even in this, we were
manipulated. The Lord Ruler knew Ruin's goals, and would never have
released him from the Well of Ascension. So, Ruin needed other
pawns—and for that to happen, the Lord Ruler needed to die.
Even our greatest victory was shaped by Ruin's subtle fingers.





24
DAYS LATER,
MELAAN'S WORDS still pricked TenSoon's conscience.
You come,
proclaim dread news, then leave us to solve the problems on our own?
During his year of imprisonment, it had seemed simple. He would
make his accusations, deliver his information, then accept the
punishment he deserved.
But now, strangely,
an eternity of imprisonment seemed like the easy way out. If he let
himself be taken in such a manner, how was he better than the First
Generation? He would be avoiding the issues, content to be locked
away, knowing that the outside world was no longer his problem.
Fool , he
thought. You'll be imprisoned for eternity—or, at least,
until the kandra themselves are destroyed, and you die of starvation.
That's not the easy way out! By accepting your punishment, you're
doing the honorable, orderly thing.
And by so doing, he
would leave MeLaan and the others to be destroyed as their leaders
refused to take action. What's more, he would leave Vin without the
information she needed. Even from within the Homeland, he could feel
the occasional rumbles in the rock. The earthquakes were still
remote, and the others likely ignored them. But TenSoon worried.
The end could be
nearing. If it was, then Vin needed to know the truths about the
kandra. Their origins, their beliefs. Perhaps she could use the Trust
itself. Yet, if he told Vin anything more, it would mean an even
greater betrayal of his people. Perhaps a human would have found it
ridiculous that he would hesitate now. However, so far, his true sins
had been impulsive, and he'd only later rationalized what he'd done.
If he fought his way free of prison, it would be different. Willful
and deliberate.
He closed his eyes,
feeling the chill of his cage, which still sat alone in the large
cavern—the place was mostly abandoned during the sleeping
hours. What was the point? Even with the Blessing of Presence—which
let TenSoon focus, despite his uncomfortable confines—he could
think of no way to escape the meshed cage and its Fifth Generation
guards, who all bore the Blessing of Potency. Even if he did get out
of the cage, TenSoon would have to pass through dozens of small
caverns. With his body mass as low as it was, he didn't have the
muscles to fight, and he couldn't outrun kandra who had the Blessing
of Potency. He was trapped.
In a way, this was
comforting. Escape was not something he preferred to contemplate—it
simply wasn't the kandra way. He had broken Contract, and deserved
punishment. There was honor in facing the consequences of one's
actions.
Wasn't there?
He shifted
positions in his cell. Unlike that of a real human, the skin of his
naked body did not become sore or chapped from the extended exposure,
for he could re-form his flesh to remove wounds. However, there was
little to do about the cramped feeling he got from being forced to
sit in the small cage for so long.
Motion caught his
attention. TenSoon turned, surprised to see VarSell and several other
large Fifths approaching his cage, their quartzite stone True Bodies
ominous in size and coloring.
Time already?
TenSoon thought. With the Blessing of Presence, he was able to
mentally recount the days of his imprisonment. It was nowhere near
time. He frowned, noting that one of the Fifths carried a large sack.
For a moment, Ten-Soon had a flash of panic as he pictured them
towing him away inside the sack.
It looked filled
already, however.
Dared he hope? Days
had passed since his conversation with MeLaan, and while she had
returned several times to look at him, they had not spoken. He'd
almost forgotten his words to her, said in the hope that they would
be overheard by the minions of the Second Generation. VarSell opened
the cage and tossed the sack in. It clinked with a familiar sound.
Bones.
"You are to
wear those to the trial," VarSell said, leaning down and putting
a translucent face up next to TenSoon's bars. "Orders of the
Second Generation."
"What is wrong
with the bones I now wear?" TenSoon asked carefully, pulling
over the sack, uncertain whether to be excited or ashamed.
"They intend
to break your bones as part of your punishment," VarSell said,
smiling. "Something like a public execution—but where the
prisoner lives through the process. It's a simple thing, I know—but
the display ought to leave . . . an impression on some of the younger
generations."
TenSoon's stomach
twisted. Kandra could re-form their bodies, true, but they felt pain
just as acutely as any human. It would take quite a severe beating to
break his bones, and with the Blessing of Presence, there would be no
release of unconsciousness for him.
"I still don't
see the need for another body," TenSoon said, pulling out one of
the bones.
"No need to
waste a perfectly good set of human bones, Third," VarSell said,
slamming the cage door closed. "I'll be back for your current
bones in a few hours."
The leg bone he
pulled out was not that of a human, but a dog. A large wolfhound. It
was the very body TenSoon had been wearing when he'd returned to the
Homeland over a year before. He closed his eyes, holding the smooth
bone in his fingers.
A week ago, he'd
spoken of how much he despised these bones, hoping that the Second
Generation's spies would carry the news back to their masters. The
Second Generation was far more traditional than MeLaan, and even she
had found the thought of wearing a dog's body distasteful. To the
Seconds, forcing TenSoon to wear an animal's body would be supremely
degrading.
That was exactly
what TenSoon had been counting on.
"You'll look
good, wearing that," VarSell said, standing to leave. "When
your punishment comes, everyone will be able to see you for what you
really are. No kandra would break his Contract."
TenSoon rubbed the
thighbone with a reverent finger, listening to VarSell's laughter.
The Fifth had no way of knowing that he'd just given TenSoon the
means he needed to escape.

The Balance. Is
it real?
We've almost
forgotten this little bit of lore. Skaa used to talk about it, before
the Collapse. Philosophers discussed it a great deal in the third and
fourth centuries, but by Kelsier's time, it was mostly a forgotten
topic.
But it was
real. There was a physiological difference between skaa and
nobility. When the Lord Ruler altered mankind to make them more
capable of dealing with ash, he changed other things as well. Some
groups of people —the noblemen —were
created to be less fertile, but taller, stronger, and more
intelligent. Others —the skaa —were
made to be shorter, hardier, and to have many children.
The changes
were slight, however, and after a thousand years of interbreeding,
the differences had largely been erased.





25
"FADREX
CITY," ELEND SAID, standing in his customary place near
the narrowboat's prow. Ahead, the broad Conway Canal—the
primary canal route to the west—continued into the distance,
turning to the northwest. To Elend's left, the ground rose in a
broken incline, forming a set of steep rock formations. He could see
them rising much higher in the distance.
Closer to the
canal, however, a broad city was nestled in the very center of a
large group of rock formations. The deep red and orange rocks were
the type left behind when wind and rain wore away weaker sections of
stone, and many of them reached high, like spires. Others formed
jagged, hedge-like barriers—like stacks of enormous blocks that
had been fused together, reaching some thirty and forty feet into the
air.
Elend could barely
see the tips of the city's buildings over the stone formations.
Fadrex had no formal city wall, of course—only Luthadel had
been allowed one of those—but the rising rocks around the city
formed a set of terrace-like natural fortifications.
Elend had been to
the city before. His father had made certain to introduce him in all
of the Final Empire's main cultural centers. Fadrex hadn't been one
of those, but it had been on the way to Tremredare, once known as the
capital of the West. In forging his new kingdom, however, Cett had
ignored Tremredare, instead establishing his capital in Fadrex. A
clever move, in Elend's estimation—Fadrex was smaller, more
defensible, and had been a major supply station for numerous canal
routes.
"The city
looks different from the last time I was here," Elend said.
"Trees,"
Ham said, standing beside him. "Fadrex used to have trees
growing on the rocky shelves and plateaus." Ham glanced at him.
"They're ready for us. They cut down the trees to provide a
better killing field and to keep us from sneaking up close."
Elend nodded. "Look
down there."
Ham squinted,
though it obviously took him a moment to pick out what Elend's
tin-enhanced eyes had noticed. On the northern side of the city—the
one closest to the main canal route—the rock terraces and
shelves fell down into a natural canyon. Perhaps twenty feet across,
it was the only way into the city, and the defenders had cut several
troughs into the floor. They were bridged at the moment, of course,
but getting through that narrow entryway, with pits in front of the
army and archers presumably firing from the rocky shelves above, with
a gate at the end . . .
"Not bad,"
Ham said. "I'm just glad they decided not to drain the canal on
us."
As they'd moved
west, the land had risen—requiring the convoy to pass through
several massive lock mechanisms. The last four had been jammed
intentionally, requiring hours of effort to get them working.
"They rely on
it too much," Elend said. "If they survive our siege,
they'll need to ship in supplies. Assuming any can be had."
Ham fell silent.
Finally, he turned, looking back up the dark canal behind them. "El,"
he said. "I don't think that much more will be traveling this
canal. The boats barely made it this far—there's too much ash
clogging it. If we go home, we'll do so on foot."
" 'If' we go
home?"
Ham shrugged.
Despite the colder western weather, he still wore only a vest. Now
that Elend was an Allomancer, he could finally understand the habit.
While burning pewter, Elend barely felt the chill, though several of
the soldiers had complained about it in the mornings.
"I don't know,
El," Ham finally said. "It just seems portentous to me. Our
canal closing behind us as we travel. Kind of like fate is trying to
strand us here."
"Ham,"
Elend said, "everything seems portentous to you. We'll
be fine."
Ham shrugged.
"Organize our
forces," Elend said, pointing. "Dock us in that inlet over
there, and set up camp on the mesa."
Ham nodded. He was
still looking backward, however. Toward Luthadel, which they had left
behind.
They don't fear
the mists , Elend thought, staring up through the darkness at
the rocky formations that marked the entrance into Fadrex City.
Bonfires blazed up there, lighting the night. Often, such lights were
futile—signifying man's fear of the mists. These fires were
different, somehow. They seemed a warning; a bold declaration of
confidence. They burned brightly, high, as if floating in the sky.
Elend turned,
walking into his illuminated commander's tent, where a small group of
people sat waiting for him. Ham, Cett, and Vin. Demoux was absent,
still recovering from mistsickness.
We're spread
thin, Elend thought. Spook and Breeze in the North, Penrod
back at Luthadel, Felt watching the storage cache in the East . . .
"All right,"
Elend said, letting the tent flaps close behind him. "Looks like
they're holed up in there pretty well."
"Initial scout
reports are in, El," Ham said. "We're guessing about
twenty-five thousand defenders."
"Not as many
as I expected," Elend said.
"That bastard
Yomen has to keep control of the rest of my kingdom," Cett said.
"If he pulled all of his troops into the capital, the other
cities would overthrow him."
"What?"
Vin asked, sounding amused. "You think they'd rebel and switch
back to your side?"
"No,"
Cett said, "they'd rebel and try to take over the kingdom
themselves! That's the way this works. Now that the Lord Ruler is
gone, every little lord or petty obligator with half a taste of power
thinks he can run a kingdom. Hell, I tried it—so did you."
"We were
successful," Ham pointed out.
"And so was
Lord Yomen," Elend said, folding his arms. "He's held this
kingdom since Cett marched on Luthadel."
"He all but
forced me out," Cett admitted. "He had half the nobility
turned against me before I even struck toward Luthadel. I said I was
leaving him in charge, but we both knew the truth. He's a clever
one—clever enough to know he can hold that city against a
larger force, letting him spread his troops out to maintain the
kingdom, and to endure a longer siege without running out of
supplies."
"Unfortunately,
Cett's probably right," Ham said. "Our initial reports
placed Yomen's forces at somewhere around eighty thousand men. He'd
be a fool to not have a few units within striking distance of our
camp. We'll have to be wary of raids."
"Double the
guards and triple scout patrols," Elend said, "particularly
during the early morning hours, when the daymist is out to obscure,
but the sun is up to provide light."
Ham nodded.
"Also,"
Elend said thoughtfully, "order the men to stay in their tents
during the mists—but tell them to be ready for a raid. If Yomen
thinks that we're afraid to come out, perhaps we can bait one of his
'surprise' attacks against us."
"Clever,"
Ham said.
"That won't
get us past those natural walls, though," Elend said, folding
his arms. "Cett, what do you say?"
"Hold the
canal," Cett said. "Post sentries up around those upper
rock formations to make certain that Yomen doesn't resupply the city
via secret means. Then, move on."
"What?"
Ham asked with surprise.
Elend eyed Cett,
trying to decide what the man meant. "Attack surrounding cities?
Leave a force here that's large enough to stymie a siege-break, then
capture other parts of his territory?"
Cett nodded. "Most
of the cities around here aren't fortified at all. They'd cave in
without a fight."
"A good
suggestion," Elend said. "But we won't do it."
"Why not?"
Cett asked.
"This isn't
just about conquering your homeland back, Cett," Elend said.
"Our primary reason for coming here is to secure that storage
cache—and I hope to do that without resorting to pillaging the
countryside."
Cett snorted. "What
do you expect to find in there? Some magical way to stop the ash?
Even atium wouldn't do that."
"Something's
in there," Elend said. "It's the only hope we have."
Cett shook his
head. "You've been chasing a puzzle left by the Lord Ruler for
the better part of a year, Elend. Hasn't it ever occurred to you that
the man was a sadist? There's no secret. No magical way out of this.
If we're going to survive the next few years, we're going to have to
do it on our own—and that means securing the Western Dominance.
The plateaus in this area represent some of the most elevated
farmland in the empire—and higher altitude means closer to the
sun. If you're going to find plants that survive despite the
daymists, you'll have to grow them here."
They were good
arguments. But I can't give up, Elend thought. Not yet.
Elend had read the reports of supplies back in Luthadel, and had seen
the projections. Ash was killing crops as much or more than the mists
were. More land wouldn't save his people—they needed something
else. Something that, he hoped, the Lord Ruler left for them.
The Lord Ruler
didn't hate his people, and he wouldn't want them to die out, even if
he were defeated. He left food, water, supplies. And, if he knew
secrets, he would have hidden them in the caches. There will be
something here.
There has to
be.
"The cache
remains our primary target," Elend said. To the side, he could
see Vin smiling.
"Fine,"
Cett said, sighing. "Then you know what we have to do. This
siege could take a while."
Elend nodded. "Ham,
send our engineers in under cover of mist. See if they can find a way
for our troops to cross those troughs. Have the scouts search out
streams that might run into the city—Cett, presumably you can
help us locate some of these. And, once we get spies into the city,
have them search out food stores that we can ruin."
"A good
start," Cett said. "Of course, there's one easy way to sow
chaos in that city, to perhaps make them surrender without a fight .
. ."
"We're not
going to assassinate King Yomen," Elend said.
"Why not?"
Cett demanded. "We've got two Mistborn. We'll have no
difficulty killing off the Fadrex leadership."
"We don't work
that way," Ham said, face growing dark.
"Oh?"
Cett asked. "That didn't stop Vin from tearing a hole through my
army and attacking me back before we teamed up."
"That was
different," Ham said.
"No,"
Elend said, interrupting. "It wasn't. The reason we're not going
to assassinate Yomen, Cett, is because I want to try diplomacy
first."
"Diplomacy?"
Cett asked. "Didn't we just march an army of forty thousand
soldiers on his city? That's not a diplomatic move."
"True,"
Elend said, nodding. "But we haven't attacked, not yet. Now that
I'm here in person, I might as well try talking before sending out
knives in the night. We might be able to persuade Lord Yomen that an
alliance will benefit him more than a war."
"If we make an
alliance," Cett said, leaning forward in his chair, "I
don't get my city back."
"I know,"
Elend said.
Cett frowned.
"You seem to
be forgetting yourself, Cett," Elend said. "You did not
'team up' with me. You knelt before me, offering up oaths of service
in exchange for not getting executed. Now, I appreciate your
allegiance, and I will see you rewarded with a kingdom to
rule under me. However, you don't get to choose where that kingdom
is, nor when I will grant it."
Cett paused,
sitting in his chair, one arm resting on his useless, paralyzed legs.
Finally, he smiled. "Damn, boy. You've changed a lot in the year
I've known you."
"So everyone
is fond of telling me," Elend said. "Vin. You think you can
get into the city?"
She raised an
eyebrow. "I hope that was meant to be rhetorical."
"It was meant
to be polite," Elend said. "I need you to do some scouting.
We know next to nothing about what's been going on in this dominance
lately—we've focused all of our efforts on Urteau and the
South."
Vin shrugged. "I
can go poke around a bit. I don't know what you expect me to find."
"Cett,"
Elend said, turning, "I need names. Informants, or perhaps some
noblemen that might still be loyal to you."
"Noblemen?"
Cett asked, amused. "Loyal?"
Elend rolled his
eyes. "How about some that could be bribed to pass on a little
information."
"Sure,"
Cett said. "I'll write up some names and locations. Assuming
they still live in the city. Hell, assuming they're even still alive.
Can't count on much these days."
Elend nodded. "We
won't take any further action until we have more information. Ham,
make certain the soldiers dig in well—use the field
fortifications that Demoux taught them. Cett, see that those guard
patrols get set up, and make certain our Tineyes remain alert and on
watch. Vin will scout and see if she can sneak into the cache like
she did in Urteau. If we know what's in there, then we can better
judge whether to gamble on trying to conquer the city or not."
The various members
of the group nodded, understanding that the meeting was over. As they
left, Elend stepped back out into the mists, looking up at the
distant bonfires burning on the rocky heights.
Quiet as a sigh,
Vin stepped up to his side, following his gaze. She stood for a few
moments. Then she glanced to the side, where a pair of soldiers were
entering the tent to carry Cett away. Her eyes narrowed in
displeasure.
"I know,"
Elend said quietly, knowing that she was thinking of Cett again and
his influence over Elend.
"You didn't
deny that you might turn to assassination," Vin said softly.
"Hopefully it
won't come to that."
"And if it
does?"
"Then I'll
make the decision that is best for the empire."
Vin was silent for
a moment. Then, she glanced at the fires up above.
"I could come
with you," Elend offered.
She smiled, then
kissed him. "Sorry," she said. "But you're noisy."
"Come now. I'm
not that bad."
"Yes you are,"
Vin said. "Plus, you smell."
"Oh?" he
asked, amused. "What do I smell like?"
"An emperor. A
Tineye would pick you out in seconds."
Elend raised his
eyebrows. "I see. And, don't you possess an imperial scent as
well?"
"Of course I
do," Vin said, wrinkling her nose. "But I know how to get
rid of it. Either way, you're not good enough to go with me, Elend.
I'm sorry."
Elend smiled. Dear,
blunt Vin.
Behind him, the
soldiers left the tent, carrying Cett. An aide walked up, delivering
to Elend a short list of informants and noblemen who might be willing
to talk. Elend passed it to Vin. "Have fun," he said.
She dropped a coin
between them, kissed him again, then shot up into the night.

I am only just
beginning to understand the brilliance of the Lord Ruler's cultural
synthesis. One of the benefits afforded him by being both immortal
and —for all relevant purposes —omnipotent
was a direct and effective influence on the evolution of the Final
Empire.
He was able to
take elements from a dozen different cultures and apply them to his
new, "perfect" society. For instance, the architectural
brilliance of the Khlenni builders is manifest in the keeps that the
high nobility construct. Khlenni fashion sense —suits
for gentlemen, gowns for ladies —is another thing the
Lord Ruler decided to appropriate.
I suspect that
despite his hatred of the Khlenni people —of whom
Alendi was one —Rashek had a deep-seated envy of them
as well. The Terris of the time were pastoral herdsmen, the Khlenni
cultured cosmopolitans. However ironic, it is logical that Rashek's
new empire would mimic the high culture of the people he hated.





26
SPOOK STOOD
IN HIS LITTLE ONE-ROOM LAIR, a room that was—of
course—illegal. The Citizen forbade such places, places where a
man could live unaccounted, unwatched. Fortunately, forbidding such
places didn't eliminate them.
It only made them
more expensive.
Spook was lucky. He
barely remembered leaping from the burning building, clutching six
Allomantic vials, coughing and bleeding. He didn't at all remember
making it back to his lair. He should probably be dead. Even
surviving the fires, he should have been sold out—if the
proprietor of his little illegal inn had realized who Spook was and
what he'd escaped, the promise of reward would undoubtedly have been
irresistible.
But, Spook had
survived. Perhaps the other thieves in the lair thought he had been
on the wrong side of a robbery. Or, perhaps they simply didn't care.
Either way, he was able to stand in front of the room's small mirror,
shirt off, looking in wonder at his wound.
I'm alive, he
thought. And . . . I feel pretty good.
He stretched,
rolling his arm in its socket. The wound hurt far less than it should
have. In the very dim light, he was able to see the cut, scabbed over
and healing. Pewter burned in his stomach—a beautiful
complement to the familiar flame of tin.
He was something
that shouldn't exist. In Allomancy, people either had just one of the
eight basic powers, or they had all fourteen powers. One or all.
Never two. Yet, Spook had tried to burn other metals without success.
Somehow, he had been given pewter alone to complement his tin.
Amazing as that was, it was overshadowed by a greater wonder.
He had seen
Kelsier's spirit. The Survivor had returned and had shown himself to
Spook.
Spook had no idea
how to react to that event. He wasn't particularly religious, but . .
. well, a dead man—one some called a god—had appeared to
him and saved his life. He worried that it had been an hallucination.
But, if that were so, how had he gained the power of pewter?
He shook his head,
reaching for his bandages, but paused as something twinkled in the
mirror's reflection. He stepped closer, relying—as always—upon
starlight from outside to provide illumination. With his extreme tin
senses, it was easy to see the bit of metal sticking from the skin in
his shoulder, even though it only protruded a tiny fraction of an
inch.
The tip of that
man's sword, Spook realized, the one that stabbed me. It
broke —the end must have gotten embedded in my skin.
He gritted his teeth, reaching to pull it free.
"No,"
Kelsier said. "Leave it. It, like the wound you bear, is a sign
of your survival."
Spook started. He
glanced about, but there was no apparition this time. Just the voice.
Yet, he was certain he'd heard it.
"Kelsier?"
he hesitantly asked.
There was no
response.
Am I going mad?
Spook wondered. Or . . . is it like the Church of the
Survivor teaches? Could it be that Kelsier had become something
greater, something that watched over his followers? And, if so, did
Kelsier always watch him? That felt a little bit . . .
unsettling. However, if it brought him the power of pewter, then who
was he to complain?
Spook turned and
put his shirt on, stretching his arm again. He needed more
information. How long had he been delirious? What was Quellion doing?
Had the others from the crew arrived yet?
Taking his mind off
of his strange visions for the moment, he slipped out of his room and
onto the dark street. As lairs went, his wasn't all that impressive—a
room behind the hidden door in a slum alleyway wall. Still, it was
better than living in one of the crowded shanties he passed as he
made his way through the dark, mist-covered city.
The Citizen liked
to pretend that everything was perfect in his little utopia, but
Spook had not been surprised to find that it had slums, just like
every other city he'd ever visited. There were many people in Urteau
who, for one reason or another, weren't fond of living in the parts
of town where the Citizen could keep watch on them. These had
aggregated in a place known as the Harrows, a particularly cramped
canal far from the main trenches.
The Harrows was
clogged with a disorderly mash of wood and cloth and bodies. Shacks
leaned against shacks, buildings leaned precariously against earth
and rock, and the entire mess piled on top of itself, creeping up the
canal walls toward the dark sky above. Here and there, people slept
under only a dirty sheet stretched between two bits of urban
flotsam—their millennium-old fear of the mists giving way
before simple necessity.
Spook shuffled down
the crowded canal. Some of the piles of half-buildings reached so
high and wide that the sky narrowed to a mere crack far above,
shining down its midnight light, too dim to be of use to any eyes but
Spook's.
Perhaps the chaos
was why the Citizen chose not to visit the Harrows. Or, perhaps he
was simply waiting to clean them out until he had a better grip on
his kingdom. Either way, his strict society, mixed with the poverty
it was creating, made for a curiously open nighttime culture. The
Lord Ruler had patrolled the streets. The Citizen, however, preached
that the mists were of Kelsier—and so could hardly forbid
people to go out in them. Urteau was the first place in Spook's
experience where a person could walk down a street at midnight and
find a small tavern open and serving drinks. He moved inside, cloak
pulled tight. There was no proper bar, just a group of dirty men
sitting around a dug-out firepit in the ground. Others sat on stools
or boxes in the corners. Spook found an empty box, and sat down.
Then he closed his
eyes and listened, filtering through the conversations. He could hear
them all, of course—even with his earplugs in. So much about
being a Tineye wasn't about what you could hear, but what you could
ignore.
Footsteps thumped
near him, and he opened his eyes. A man wearing trousers sewn with a
dozen different buckles and chains stopped in front of Spook, then
thumped a bottle on the ground. "Everyone drinks," the man
said. "I have to pay to keep this place warm. Nobody just sits
for free."
"What have you
got?" Spook asked.
The bartender
kicked the bottle. "House Venture special vintage. Aged fifty
years. Used to go for six hundred boxings a bottle."
Spook smiled,
fishing out a pek—a coin minted by the Citizen to be worth a
fraction of a copper clip. A combination of economic collapse and the
Citizen's disapproval of luxury meant that a bottle of wine that had
once been worth hundreds of boxings was now practically worthless.
"Three for the
bottle," the bartender said, holding out his hand.
Spook brought out
two more coins. The bartender left the bottle on the floor, and so
Spook picked it up. He had been offered no corkscrew or cup—both
likely cost extra, though this vintage of wine did have a cork that
stuck up a few inches above the bottle's lip. Spook eyed it.
I wonder .
. . .
He had his pewter
on a low burn—not flared like his tin. Just there enough to
help with the fatigue and the pain. In fact, it did its job so well
that he'd nearly forgotten about his wound during the walk to the
bar. He stoked the pewter a bit, and the rest of the wound's pain
vanished. Then, Spook grabbed the cork, pulling it with a quick jerk.
It came free of the bottle with barely a hint of resistance.
Spook tossed the
cork aside. I think I'm going to like this, he thought with
a smile.
He took a drink of
the wine straight from the bottle, listening for interesting
conversations. He had been sent to Urteau to gather information, and
he wouldn't be much use to Elend or the others if he stayed lying in
bed. Dozens of muffled conversations echoed in the room, most of them
harsh. This wasn't the kind of place where one found men loyal to the
local government—which was precisely why Spook had found his
way to the Harrows in the first place.
"They say he's
going to get rid of coins," a man whispered at the main firepit.
"He's making plans to gather them all up, keep them in his
treasury."
"That's
foolish," another voice replied. "He minted his own
coins—why take them now?"
"It's true,"
the first voice said. "I seen him speak on it myself. He says
that men shouldn't have to rely on coins—that we should have
everything together, not having to buy and sell."
"The Lord
Ruler never let skaa have coins either," another voice grumbled.
"Seems that the longer old Quellion is in charge, the more he
looks like that rat the Survivor killed."
Spook raised an
eyebrow, taking another chug of wine. Vin, not Kelsier, was the one
who had killed the Lord Ruler. Urteau, however, was a significant
distance from Luthadel. They probably hadn't even known about the
Lord Ruler's fall until weeks after it happened. Spook moved on to
another conversation, searching for those who spoke in furtive
whispers. He found exactly what he was listening for in a couple of
men sharing a bottle of fine wine as they sat on the floor in the
corner.
"He has most
everyone catalogued now," the man whispered. "But he's not
done yet. He has those scribes of his, the genealogists. They're
asking questions, interrogating neighbors and friends, trying to
trace everyone back five generations, looking for noble blood."
"But, he only
kills those who have noblemen back two generations."
"There's going
to be a division," the other voice whispered. "Every man
who is pure back five generations will be allowed to serve in the
government. Everyone else will be forbidden. It's a time when a man
could make a great deal of coin if he could help people hide certain
events in their past."
Hum ,
Spook thought, taking a swig of wine. Oddly, the alcohol didn't seem
to be affecting him very much. The pewter , he realized. It
strengthens the body, makes it more resistant to pains and wounds.
And, perhaps, helps it avoid intoxication?
He smiled. The
ability to drink and not grow drunk—an advantage of pewter that
nobody had told him about. There had to be a way to use such a skill.
He turned his
attention to other bar patrons, searching for useful tidbits. Another
conversation spoke of work in the mines. Spook felt a chill and a
flicker of remembrance. The men spoke of a coal mine, not a gold
mine, but the grumbles were the same. Cave-ins. Dangerous gas. Stuffy
air and uncaring taskmasters.
That would have
been my life, Spook thought. If Clubs hadn't come for me.
To this day, he
still didn't understand. Why had Clubs traveled so far—visiting
the distant eastern reaches of the Final Empire—to rescue a
nephew he'd never met? Surely there had been young Allomancers in
Luthadel who had been equally deserving of his protection.
Clubs had spent a
fortune, traveled a long distance in an empire where skaa were
forbidden to leave their home cities, and had risked betrayal by
Spook's father. For that, Clubs had earned the loyalty of a wild
street boy who—before that time—had run from any
authority figure who tried to control him.
What would it
be like? Spook thought. If Clubs hadn't come for me, I would
never have been in Kelsier's crew. I might have hidden my Allomancy
and refused to use it. I might have simply gone to the mines, living
my life like any other skaa.
The men
commiserated about the deaths of several who had fallen to a cave-in.
It seemed that for them, little had changed since the days of the
Lord Ruler. Spook's life would have been like theirs, he suspected.
He'd be out in those Eastern wastes, living in sweltering dust when
outside, working in cramped confines the rest of the time.
Most of his life,
it seemed that he had been a flake of ash, pushed around by whatever
strong wind came his way. He'd gone where people told him to go, done
what they'd wanted him to. Even as an Allomancer, Spook had lived his
life as a nobody. The others had been great men. Kelsier had
organized an impossible revolution. Vin had struck down the Lord
Ruler himself. Clubs had led the armies of revolution, becoming
Elend's foremost general. Sazed was a Keeper, and had carried the
knowledge of centuries. Breeze had moved waves of people with his
clever tongue and powerful Soothing, and Ham was a powerful soldier.
But Spook, he had simply watched, not really doing anything.
Until the day he
ran away, leaving Clubs to die.
Spook sighed,
looking up. "I just want to be able to help," he whispered.
"You can,"
Kelsier's voice said. "You can be great. Like I was."
Spook started,
glancing about. But, nobody else appeared to have heard the voice.
Spook sat back uncomfortably. However, the words made sense. Why did
he always berate himself so much? True, Kelsier hadn't picked him to
be on the crew, but now the Survivor himself had appeared to Spook
and granted him the power of pewter.
I could help
the people of this city, he thought. Like Kelsier helped
those of Luthadel. I could do something important: bring Urteau into
Elend's empire, deliver the storage cache as well as the loyalty of
the people.
I ran away
once. I don't ever have to do that again. I won't ever do
that again!
Smells of wine,
bodies, ash, and mold hung in the air. Spook could feel the very
grain in the stool beneath him despite his clothing, the movements of
people throughout the building shuffling and vibrating the ground
beneath his feet. And, with all of this, pewter burned inside of him.
He flared it, made it strong alongside his tin. The bottle cracked in
his hand, his fingers pressing too hard, though he released it
quickly enough to keep it from shattering. It fell toward the floor,
and he snatched it from the air with his other hand, the arm moving
with blurring quickness.
Spook blinked, awed
at the speed of his own motions. Then, he smiled. I'm going to
need more pewter, he thought.
"That's him."
Spook froze.
Several of the conversations in the room had stopped, and to his
ears—accustomed to a cacophony—the growing silence was
eerie. He glanced to the side. The men who had been speaking of the
mines were looking at Spook, speaking softly enough that they
probably assumed he couldn't hear them.
"I'm telling
you I saw him get run through by the guards. Everyone
thought he was dead even before they burned him."
Not good ,
Spook thought. He hadn't thought himself memorable enough for people
to notice. But . . . then again, he had attacked a group of soldiers
in the middle of the city's busiest market.
"Durn's been
talking about him," the voice continued. "Said he was of
the Survivor's own crew . . ."
Durn, Spook
thought. So he does know who I really am. Why has he been telling
people my secrets? I thought he was more careful than that.
Spook stood up as
nonchalantly as he could, then fled into the night.

Yes, Rashek
made good use of his enemy's culture in developing the Final Empire.
Yet, other elements of imperial culture were a complete contrast to
Khlennium and its society. The lives of the skaa were modeled after
the slave peoples of the Canzi. The Terris stewards resembled the
servant class of Urtan, which Rashek conquered relatively late in his
first century of life.
The imperial
religion, with its obligators, actually appears to have arisen from
the bureaucratic mercantile system of the Hallant, a people who were
very focused on weights, measures, and permissions. The fact that the
Lord Ruler would base his Church on a financial institution shows —in
my opinion —that he worried less about true faith in
his followers, and more about stability, loyalty, and quantifiable
measures of devotion.





27
VIN SHOT
THROUGH THE DARK NIGHT AIR. Mist swirled about her, a
spinning, seething storm of white upon black. It darted close to her
body, as if snapping at her, but never came closer than a few inches
away—as if blown back by some current of air. She remembered a
time when the mist had skimmed close to her skin, rather than being
repelled. The transition had been gradual; it had taken months before
she had realized the change.
She wore no
mistcloak. It felt odd to be leaping about in the mists without one
of the garments, but in truth, she was quieter this way. Once, the
mistcloak had been useful in making guards or thieves turn away at
her passing. However, like the era of friendly mists, that time had
passed. So, instead, she wore only a black shirt and trousers, both
closely fitted to her body to keep the sounds of flapping fabric to a
minimum. As always, she wore no metal save for the coins in her pouch
and an extra vial of metals in her sash. She pulled out a coin
now—its familiar weight wrapped in a layer of cloth—and
threw it beneath her. A Push against the metal sent it slamming into
the rocks below, but the cloth dampened the sound of its striking.
She used the Push to slow her descent, popping her up slightly into
the air.
She landed
carefully on a rock ledge, then Pulled the coin back into her hand.
She crept across the rocky shelf, fluffy ash beneath her toes. A
short distance away, a small group of guards sat in the darkness,
whispering quietly, watching Elend's army camp—which was now
little more than a haze of campfire light in the mists. The guards
spoke of the spring chill, commenting that it seemed colder this year
than it had in previous ones. Though Vin was barefoot, she rarely
noticed the cold. A gift of pewter.
Vin burned bronze,
and heard no pulsings. None of the men were burning metals. One of
the reasons Cett had come to Luthadel in the first place was because
he'd been unable to raise enough Allomancers to protect him from
Mist-born assassins. No doubt Lord Yomen had experienced similar
trouble recruiting Allomancers, and he probably wouldn't have sent
those he did have out into the cold to watch an enemy camp.
Vin crept past the
guard post. She didn't need Allomancy to keep her quiet—she and
her brother, Reen, had sometimes been burglars, sneaking into homes.
She had a lifetime of training that Elend would never know or
understand. He could practice with pewter all he liked—and he
really was getting better—but he'd never be able to replicate
instincts honed by a childhood spent sneaking to stay alive.
As soon as she was
past the guard post, she jumped into the mists again, using her
sound-deadened coins as anchors. She gave the fires at the front of
the city a wide berth, instead rounding to the rear of Fadrex. Most
of the patrols would be at the front of the city, for the back was
protected by the steep walls of the rising rock formations. Of
course, that barely inconvenienced Vin, and she soon found herself
dropping several hundred feet through the air along a rock wall
before landing in an alley at the very back of the city.
She took to the
roofs and did a quick survey, jumping from street to street in wide
Allomantic leaps. She was quickly impressed with Fadrex's size. Elend
had called the city "provincial," and Vin had imagined a
town barely larger than a village. Once they'd arrived, she'd instead
begun to imagine a barricaded, austere city—more like a fort.
Fadrex was neither.
She should have
realized that Elend—who had been raised in the sprawling
metropolis of Luthadel—would have a skewed concept of what
constituted a large city. Fadrex was plenty big. Vin counted several
skaa slums, a smattering of noble mansions, and even two
Luthadel-style keeps. The grand stone structures sported the typical
arrangement of stained-glass windows and soaring, buttressed walls.
These were undoubtedly the homes of the most important nobles in the
city.
She landed on a
rooftop near one of the keeps. Most of the buildings in the city were
only a single story or two, which was quite a change from the high
tenements of Luthadel. They were spaced out a bit more, and tended to
be flat and squat, rather than tall and peaked. That only made the
massive keep seem so much larger by comparison. The building was
rectangular, with a row of three peaked towers rising from each end.
Ornamented white stonework ran around the entire perimeter at the
top.
And the walls, of
course, were lined with beautiful stained-glass windows, lit from
inside. Vin crouched on a low rooftop, looking at the colored beauty
of the swirling mists. For a moment, she was taken back to a time
three years before, when she had attended balls in keeps like this
one in Luthadel as part of Kelsier's plan to overthrow the Final
Empire. She had been an uncertain, nervous thing back then, worried
that her newfound world of a trustworthy crew and beautiful parties
would collapse around her. And, in a way, it had—for that world
was gone. She had helped to destroy it.
Yet, during those
months, she had been content. Perhaps more content than any other
time in her life. She loved Elend, and was glad life had progressed
to the point where she could call him husband, but there had been a
delicious innocence about her early days with the crew. Dances spent
with Elend reading at her table, pretending to ignore her. Nights
spent learning the secrets of Allomancy. Evenings spent sitting
around the table at Clubs's shop, sharing laughter with the crew.
They'd faced the challenge of planning something as large as the fall
of an empire, yet felt no burden of leadership or weight of
responsibility for the future.
Somehow, she had
grown into a woman in between the fall of kings and collapse of
worlds. Once she had been terrified of change. Then she had been
terrified of losing Elend. Now her fears were more nebulous—worries
of what would come after she was gone, worries of what would happen
to the people of the empire if she failed to divine the secrets she
sought.
She turned from her
contemplation of the large, castle-like keep, Pushing herself off of
a chimney brace and into the night. Attending those balls in Luthadel
had changed her dramatically, leaving a residual effect that she'd
never been able to shake. Something within her had responded
instantly to the dancing and the parties. For the longest time, she'd
struggled to understand how that part of her fit into the rest of her
life. She still wasn't certain she knew the answer. Was Valette
Renoux—the girl she had pretended to be at the balls—really
a part of Vin, or just a fabrication devised to serve Kelsier's plot?
Vin bounded across
the city, making cursory notes of fortifications and troop
placements. Ham and Demoux would probably find a way to get true
military spies into the city eventually, but they'd want to hear
preliminary information from Vin. She also made note of living
conditions. Elend had hoped that the city would be struggling, a
factor that his siege would exacerbate, making Lord Yomen more likely
to capitulate.
She found no
obvious signs of mass starvation or disrepair—though it was
difficult to tell much at night. Still, the city streets were kept
swept of ash, and a remarkable number of the noble homes appeared
occupied. She would have expected the noble population to be the
first to bolt at news of an approaching army.
Frowning to
herself, Vin completed her loop of the city, landing in a particular
square that Cett had suggested. The mansions here were separated from
each other by large grounds and cultivated trees; she walked along
the street, counting them off. At the fourth mansion, she leaped up
and over the gate, then moved up the hill to the house.
She wasn't certain
what she expected to find—Cett had been absent from the city
for two years, after all. Yet, he'd indicated that this informant was
the most likely to be of help. True to Cett's instructions, the rear
balcony of the mansion was lit. Vin waited in the darkness
suspiciously, the mist cold and unfriendly, yet providing cover. She
didn't trust Cett—she worried that he still bore her a grudge
for her attack on his keep in Luthadel a year before. Wary, she
dropped a coin and launched herself into the air.
A lone figure sat
on the balcony, fitting the description in Cett's instructions. Those
same instructions gave this informant the nickname Slowswift. The old
man appeared to be reading by the light of a lamp. Vin frowned, but
as instructed, she landed on the balcony railing, crouching beside a
ladder that would have allowed a more mundane visitor to approach.
The old man did not
look up from his book. He puffed quietly on a pipe, a thick woolen
blanket across his knees. Vin wasn't certain if he noticed her or
not. She cleared her throat.
"Yes, yes,"
the old man said calmly. "I shall be with you in a moment."
Vin cocked her
head, looking at the strange man with his bushy eyebrows and frosty
white hair. He was dressed in a nobleman's suit, with a scarf and an
overcoat that bore an oversized fur collar. He appeared to be
completely unconcerned by the Mistborn crouching on his railing.
Eventually, the elderly man closed his book, then turned toward her.
"Do you enjoy stories, young lady?"
"What kind of
stories?"
"The best
kind, of course," Slowswift said, tapping his book. "The
kind about monsters and myths. Longtales, some call them—stories
told by skaa around the fires, whispering of mistwraiths, sprites,
and brollins and such."
"I don't have
much time for stories," Vin said.
"Seems that
fewer and fewer people do, these days." A canopy kept off the
ash, but he seemed unconcerned about the mists. "It makes me
wonder what is so alluring about the real world that gives them all
such a fetish for it. It's not a very nice place these days."
Vin did a quick
check with bronze, but the man burned nothing. What was his game? "I
was told that you could give me information," she said
carefully.
"That I can
certainly do," the man said. Then he smiled, glancing at her. "I
have a wealth of information—though somehow I suspect that you
might find most of it useless."
"I'll listen
to a story, if that's what it will cost."
The man chuckled.
"There's no surer way to kill a story than to make it a 'cost,'
young lady. What is your name, and who sent you?"
"Vin Venture,"
Vin said. "Cett gave me your name."
"Ah," the
man said. "That scoundrel still alive?"
"Yes."
"Well, I
suppose I could chat with someone sent by an old writing friend. Come
down off that railing—you're giving me vertigo."
Vin climbed down,
wary. "Writing friend?"
"Cett is one
of the finest poets I know, child," said Slowswift, waving her
toward a chair. "We shared our work with one another for a good
decade or so before politics stole him away. He didn't like stories
either. To him, everything had to be gritty and 'real,' even his
poetry. Seems like an attitude with which you'd agree."
Vin shrugged,
sitting in the indicated chair. "I suppose."
"I find that
ironic in a way you shall never understand," the old man said,
smiling. "Now, what is it you wish of me?"
"I need to
know about Yomen, the obligator king."
"He's a good
man."
Vin frowned.
"Oh,"
Slowswift said. "You didn't expect that? Everyone who is your
enemy must also be an evil person?"
"No," Vin
said, thinking back to the days before the fall of the Final Empire.
"I ended up marrying someone my friends would have named an
enemy."
"Ah. Well
then, Yomen is a fine man, and a decent king. A fair bit better a
king than Cett ever was, I'd say. My old friend tries too hard, and
that makes him brutal. He doesn't have the subtle touch that a leader
needs."
"What has
Yomen done that is so good, then?" Vin asked.
"He kept the
city from falling apart," Slowswift said, puffing on his pipe.
The smoke mixed with the swirling mists. "Plus, he gave both
nobility and skaa what they wanted."
"Which was?"
"Stability,
child. For a time, the world was in turmoil—neither skaa nor
nobleman knew his place. Society was collapsing, and people were
starving. Cett did little to stop that—he fought constantly to
keep what he'd killed to obtain. Then Yomen stepped in. People saw
authority in him. Before the Collapse, the Lord Ruler's Ministry had
ruled, and the people were ready to accept an obligator as a leader.
Yomen immediately took control of the plantations and brought food to
his people, then he returned the factories to operation, started work
in the Fadrex mines again, and gave the nobility a semblance of
normalcy."
Vin sat quietly.
Before, it might have seemed incredible to her that—after a
thousand years of oppression—the people would willingly return
to slavery. Yet, something similar had happened in Luthadel. They had
ousted Elend, who had granted them great freedoms, and had put Penrod
in charge—all because he promised them a return to what they
had lost.
"Yomen is an
obligator," she said.
"People like
what is familiar, child."
"They're
oppressed."
"Someone must
lead," the old man said. "And, someone must follow. That is
the way of things. Yomen has given the people something they've been
crying for since the Collapse—identity. The skaa may work, they
may be beaten, they may be enslaved, but they know their place. The
nobility may spend their time going to balls, but there is an order
to life again."
"Balls?"
Vin asked. "The world is ending, and Yomen is throwing balls?"
"Of course,"
Slowswift said, taking a long, slow puff on his pipe. "Yomen
rules by maintaining the familiar. He gives the people what they had
before—and balls were a large part of life before the Collapse,
even in a smaller city like Fadrex. Why, there is one happening
tonight, at Keep Orielle."
"On the very
day an army arrived to besiege the city?"
"You just
pointed out that the world seems very close to disaster," the
old man said, pointing at her with his pipe. "In the face of
that, an army doesn't mean much. Plus, Yomen understands something
even the Lord Ruler didn't—Yomen always personally attends the
balls thrown by his subjects. In doing so, he comforts and reassures
them. That makes a day like this, when an army arrived, a perfect day
for a ball."
Vin sat back,
uncertain what to think. Of all the things she had expected to find
in the city, courtly balls were very low on the list. "So,"
she said. "What's Yomen's weakness? Is there something in his
past that we can use? What quirks of personality make him vulnerable?
Where should we strike?"
Slowswift puffed
quietly on his pipe, a breeze blowing mist and ash across his elderly
figure.
"Well?"
Vin asked.
The old man let out
a breath of mist and smoke. "I just told you that I like the
man, child. What would possess me to give you information to use
against him?"
"You're an
informant," Vin said. "That's what you do—sell
information."
"I'm a
storyteller," Slowswift corrected. "And not every story is
meant for every set of ears. Why should I talk to those who would
attack my city and overthrow my liege?"
"We'd give you
a powerful position in the city once it is ours."
Slowswift snorted
quietly. "If you think such things would interest me, then Cett
obviously told you little regarding my temperament."
"We could pay
you well."
"I sell
information, child. Not my soul."
"You're not
being very helpful," Vin noted.
"And tell me,
dear child," he said, smiling slightly. "Why exactly should
I care?"
Vin frowned. This
is, she thought, undoubtedly the strangest informant meeting
I've ever been to.
Slowswift puffed on
his pipe. He didn't appear to be waiting for her to say anything. In
fact, he seemed to think the conversation was over.
He's a
nobleman, Vin thought. He likes the way that the world used
to be. It was comfortable. Even skaa fear change.
Vin stood. "I'll
tell you why you should care, old man. Because the ash is falling,
and soon it will cover up your pretty little city. The mists kill.
Earthquakes shake the landscape, and the ashmounts burn hotter and
hotter. Change is looming. Eventually, even Yomen won't be able to
ignore it. You hate change. I hate it too. But things can't stay the
same—and that's well, for when nothing changes in your life,
it's as good as being dead." She turned to leave.
"They say
you'll stop the ash," the old man said quietly from behind.
"Turn the sun yellow again. They call you Heir of the Survivor.
Hero of Ages."
Vin paused, turning
to look through the traitorous mist toward the man with his pipe and
closed book. "Yes," she said.
"Seems like
quite the destiny to live up to."
"It's either
that or give up."
Slowswift sat
silently for a moment. "Sit down, child," the old man
finally said, gesturing toward the seat again.
Vin reseated
herself.
"Yomen is a
good man," Slowswift said, "but only a mediocre leader.
He's a bureaucrat, a member of the Canton of Resource. He can make
things happen—get supplies to the right places, organize
construction projects. Ordinarily, that would have made him a good
enough ruler. However . . ."
"Not when the
world is ending," Vin said softly.
"Precisely. If
what I've heard is true, then your husband is a man of vision and
action. If our little city is going to survive, then we'll need to be
part of what you are offering."
"What do we
do, then?"
"Yomen has few
weaknesses," Slowswift said. "He's a calm man, and an
honorable one. However, he has an unfailing belief in the Lord Ruler
and his organization."
"Even now?"
Vin asked. "The Lord Ruler died!"
"Yes, so?"
Slowswift asked, amused. "And your Survivor? Last I checked, he
was somewhat dead as well. Didn't seem to hinder his revolution much,
now did it?"
"Good point."
"Yomen is a
believer," Slowswift said. "That may be a weakness; it may
be a strength. Believers are often willing to attempt the seemingly
impossible, then count on providence to see them through." He
paused, glancing at Vin. "That sort of behavior can be a
weakness if the belief is misplaced."
Vin said nothing.
Belief in the Lord Ruler was misplaced. If he'd been a god,
then she wouldn't have been able to kill him. In her mind, it was a
rather simple matter.
"If Yomen has
another weakness," Slowswift said, "it is his wealth."
"Hardly a
weakness."
"It is if you
can't account for its source. He got money somewhere—a
suspiciously vast amount of it, far more than even local Ministry
coffers should have been able to provide. Nobody knows where it came
from."
The cache, Vin
thought, perking up. He really does have the atium!
"You reacted a
little too strongly to that one," Slowswift said, taking a puff
on his pipe. "You should try to give less away when speaking
with an informant."
Vin flushed.
"Anyway,"
the old man said, turning back to his book, "if that is all, I
should like to return to my reading. Give my regards to Ashweather."
Vin nodded, rising
and moving over toward the banister. As she did, however, Slowswift
cleared his throat. "Usually," he noted, "there is
compensation for acts such as mine."
Vin raised an
eyebrow. "I thought you said that stories shouldn't cost."
"Actually,"
Slowswift noted, "I said that a story itself shouldn't be a
cost. That is very different from the story itself costing something.
And, while some will argue, I believe that a story without cost is
one considered worthless."
"I'm sure
that's the only reason," Vin said, smiling slightly as she
tossed her bag of coins—minus a few cloth-covered ones to use
for jumping—to the old man. "Gold imperials. Still good
here, I assume?"
"Good enough,"
the old man said, tucking them away. "Good enough . . ."
Vin jumped out into
the night, leaping a few houses away, burning bronze to see if she
felt any Allomantic pulses from behind. She knew that her nature made
her irrationally suspicious of people who appeared weak. For the
longest time, she'd been convinced that Cett was Mistborn, simply
because he was paraplegic. Still, she checked on Slowswift. This was
one old habit that she didn't feel much need to extinguish.
No pulses came from
behind. Soon, she moved on, pulling out Cett's instructions,
searching out a second informant. She trusted Slowswift's words well
enough, but she would like confirmation. She picked an informant on
the other side of the spectrum—a beggar named Hoid whom Cett
claimed could be found in a particular square late at night.
A few quick jumps
brought her to the location. She landed atop a roof and looked down,
scanning the area. The ash had been allowed to drift here, piling in
corners, making a general mess of things. A group of lumps huddled in
an alley beside the square. Beggars, without home or job. Vin had
lived like that at times, sleeping in alleys, coughing up ash, hoping
it wouldn't rain. She soon located a figure that wasn't sleeping like
the others, but sitting quietly in the light ashfall. Her ears picked
out a faint sound. The man was humming to himself, as the
instructions said that he might be doing.
Vin hesitated.
She couldn't decide
what it was, but something bothered her about the situation. It
wasn't right. She didn't stop to think, she simply turned and jumped
away. That was one of the big differences between her and Elend—she
didn't always need a reason. A feeling was enough. He always wanted
to tease things out and find a why, and she loved him for
his logic. However, he would have been very frustrated about her
decision to turn away from the square as she had.
Perhaps nothing bad
would have happened if she'd gone into the square. Perhaps something
terrible would have occurred. She would never know, nor did she need
to know. As she had countless other times in her life, Vin simply
accepted her instincts and moved on.
Her flight took her
along a street that Cett had noted in his instructions. Curious, Vin
didn't search out another informant, but instead followed the road,
bounding from anchor to anchor in the pervasive mists. She landed on
a cobbled street a short distance from a building with lit windows.
Blocky and
utilitarian, the building was nonetheless daunting—if only
because of its size. Cett had written that the Canton of Resource was
the largest of the Steel Ministry buildings in the city. Fadrex had
acted as a kind of way station between Luthadel and more important
cities to the west. Near several main canal routes and well fortified
against banditry, the city was the perfect place for a Canton of
Resource regional headquarters. Yet, Fadrex hadn't been important
enough to attract the Cantons of Orthodoxy or
Inquisition—traditionally the most powerful of the Ministry
departments.
That meant that
Yomen, as head obligator at the Resource building, had been the
area's top religious authority. From what Slowswift said, Vin assumed
that Yomen was pretty much a standard Resource obligator: dry,
boring, but terribly efficient. And so, of course, he'd chosen to
make his old Canton building into his palace. It was what Cett had
suspected, and Vin could easily see that it was true. The building
bustled with activity despite the late hour, and was guarded by
platoons of soldiers. Yomen had probably chosen the building in order
to remind everyone where his authority originated.
Unfortunately, it
was also where the Lord Ruler's supply cache would be located. Vin
sighed, turning from her contemplation of the building. Part of her
wanted to sneak in and try to find her way down to the cavern
beneath. Instead, she dropped a coin and shot herself into the air.
Even Kelsier wouldn't have tried breaking into the place on his first
night of scouting. She'd gotten into the one in Urteau, but it had
been abandoned. She had to confer with Elend and study the city for a
few days before she did something as bold as sneak into a fortified
palace.
Using starlight and
tin, Vin read off the name of the third and final informant. It was
another nobleman, which wasn't surprising, considering Cett's own
station. She began moving in the direction indicated. However, as she
moved, she noticed something.
She was being
followed.
She only caught
hints of him behind her, obscured by the patterns of swirling mist.
Tentatively, Vin burned bronze, and was rewarded with a very faint
thumping from behind. An obscured Allomantic pulse. Usually, when an
Allomancer burned copper—as the one behind her was doing—it
made him invisible to the Allomantic bronze sense. Yet, for some
reason Vin had never been able to explain, she could see through this
obfuscation. The Lord Ruler had been able to do likewise, as had his
Inquisitors.
Vin continued to
move. The Allomancer following her obviously believed himself—or
herself—invisible to Vin's senses. He moved with quick, easy
bounds, following at a safe distance. He was good without being
excellent, and he was obviously Mistborn, for only a Mistborn could
have burned both copper and steel at the same time.
Vin wasn't
surprised. She'd assumed that if there were any Mistborn in the city,
her leaping would draw their attention. Just in case, she hadn't
bothered burning any copper herself, leaving her pulses open to be
heard by anyone—Mistborn or Seeker—who was listening.
Better an enemy drawn out than one hiding in the shadows.
She increased her
pace, though not suspiciously so, and the person following had to
move quickly to keep up. Vin kept going toward the front of the city,
as if planning to leave. As she got closer, her Allomantic senses
produced twin blue lines pointing at the massive iron brackets
holding the city gates to the rock at their sides. The brackets were
large, substantial sources of metal, and the lines they gave off were
bright and thick.
Which meant they
would make excellent anchors. Flaring her pewter to keep from being
crushed, Vin Pushed on the brackets, throwing herself
backward.
Immediately, the
Allomantic pulses behind her disappeared.
Vin shot through
ash and mist, even her tight clothing flapping slightly from the
wind. She quickly Pulled herself down to a rooftop and crouched,
tense. The other Allomancer must have stopped burning his metals. But
why would he do that? Did he know that she could pierce copperclouds?
If he did, then why had he followed her so recklessly?
Vin felt a chill.
There was something else that gave off Allomantic pulses in the
night. The mist spirit. She hadn't seen it in over a year. In fact,
during her last encounter with it, it had nearly killed Elend—only
to then restore him by making him Mistborn.
She still didn't
know how the spirit fit into all of this. It wasn't Ruin—she
had felt Ruin's presence when she'd freed him at the Well of
Ascension. They were different.
I don't even
know if this was the spirit tonight , Vin told herself.
Yet, the one tailing her had vanished so abruptly. . . .
Confused, and
chilled, she Pushed herself out of the city and quickly made her way
back to Elend's camp.

One final
aspect of the Lord Ruler's cultural manipulation is quite
interesting: that of technology.
I have already
mentioned that Rashek chose to use Khlenni architecture, which
allowed him to construct large structures and gave him the civil
engineering necessary to build a city as large as Luthadel. In other
areas, however, he suppressed technological advancements. Gunpowder,
for instance, was so frowned upon by Rashek that knowledge of its use
disappeared almost as quickly as knowledge of the Terris religion.
Apparently,
Rashek found it alarming that armed with gunpowder weapons, even the
most common of men could be nearly as effective as archers with years
of training. And so, he favored archers. The more training-dependent
military technology was, the less likely it was that the peasant
population would be able to rise up and resist him. Indeed, skaa
revolts always failed in part for this very reason.





28
"ARE
YOU SURE IT WAS THE MIST SPIRIT?" Elend asked,
frowning, a half-finished letter—scribed into a steel foil
sheet—sitting on his desk before him. He'd decided to sleep in
his cabin aboard the narrowboat, rather than in a tent. Not only was
it more comfortable, he felt more secure with walls around him, as
opposed to canvas.
Vin sighed, sitting
down on their bed, pulling her legs up and setting her chin on her
knees. "I don't know. I kind of got spooked, so I fled."
"Good thing,"
Elend said, shivering as he remembered what the mist spirit had done
to him.
"Sazed was
convinced that the mist spirit wasn't evil," Vin said.
"So was I,"
Elend said. "If you'll remember, I'm the one who walked right up
to it, telling you that I felt it was friendly. That was right about
the time it stabbed me."
Vin shook her head.
"It was trying to keep me from releasing Ruin. It thought that
if you were dying, I would take the power for myself and heal you,
rather than giving it up."
"You don't
know its intentions for certain, Vin. You could be connecting
coincidences in your mind."
"Perhaps.
However, it led Sazed to discover that Ruin was altering text."
That much, at
least, was true—if, indeed, Sazed's account of the matter could
be trusted. The Terrisman had been a little bit . . . inconsistent
since Tindwyl had died. No, Elend told himself, feeling an
instant stab of guilt. No, Sazed is trustworthy. He might be
struggling with his faith, but he is still twice as reliable as the
rest of us.
"Oh, Elend,"
Vin said softly. "There's so much we don't know. Lately, I feel
like my life is a book written in a language I don't know how to
read. The mist spirit is related to all this, but I can't even begin
to fathom how."
"It's probably
on our side," Elend said, though it was hard not to keep
flashing back to memories of how it had felt to be stabbed, to feel
his life fading away. To die, knowing what it would do to Vin.
He forced himself
back to the conversation at hand. "You think the mist spirit
tried to keep you from releasing Ruin, and Sazed says it gave him
important information. That makes it the enemy of our enemy."
"For the
moment," Vin said. "But, the mist spirit is much weaker
than Ruin. I've felt them both. Ruin was . . . vast. Powerful. It can
hear whatever we say—can see all places at once. The mist
spirit is far fainter. More like a memory than a real force or
power."
"Do you still
think it hates you?"
Vin shrugged. "I
haven't seen it in over a year. Yet, I'm pretty sure that it isn't
the sort of thing that changes, and I always felt hatred and
animosity from it." She paused, frowning. "That was the
beginning. That night when I first saw the mist spirit was when I
began to sense that the mists were no longer my home."
"Are you sure
the spirit isn't what kills people and makes them sick?"
Vin nodded. "Yes,
I'm sure." She was adamant about this, though Elend felt she was
a bit quick to judge. Something ghost-like, moving about in the
mists? It seemed like just the kind of thing that would be related to
people dying suddenly in those same mists.
Of course, the
people who died in the mists didn't die of stabbings, but of a
shaking disease. Elend sighed, rubbing his eyes. His unfinished
letter to Lord Yomen sat on his desk—he'd have to get back to
it in the morning.
"Elend,"
Vin said. "Tonight, I told someone that I'd stop the ash from
falling and turn the sun yellow."
Elend raised an
eyebrow. "That informant you spoke of?"
Vin nodded. The two
sat in silence.
"I never
expected you to admit something like that," he finally said.
"I'm the Hero
of Ages, aren't I? Even Sazed said so, before he started to go
strange. It's my destiny."
"The same
'destiny' that said you would take up the power of the Well of
Ascension, then release it for the greater good of mankind?"
Vin nodded.
"Vin,"
Elend said with a smile, "I really don't think 'destiny' is the
sort of thing we need to worry about right now. I mean, we have proof
that the prophecies were twisted by Ruin in order to trick people
into freeing him."
"Someone has
to worry about the ash," Vin said.
There wasn't much
he could say to that. The logical side of him wanted to argue,
claiming that they should focus on the things they could do—making
a stable government, uncovering the secrets left by the Lord Ruler,
securing the supplies in the caches. Yet, the constant ashfall seemed
to be growing even denser. If that continued, it wouldn't be long
before the sky was nothing more than a solid black storm of ash.
It just seemed so
difficult to think that Vin—his wife—could do anything
about the color of the sun or the falling ash. Demoux is right,
he thought, tapping his fingers across the metallic letter to Lord
Yomen. I'm really not a very good member of the Church of the
Survivor.
He looked across
the cabin at her, sitting on the bed, expression distant as she
thought about things that shouldn't have to be her burden. Even after
leaping about all night, even after their days spent traveling, even
with her face dirtied by ash, she was beautiful.
At that moment,
Elend realized something. Vin didn't need another person worshipping
her. She didn't need another faithful believer like Demoux,
especially not in Elend. He didn't need to be a good member of the
Church of the Survivor. He needed to be a good husband.
"Well, then,"
he said. "Let's do it."
"What?"
Vin asked.
"Save the
world," Elend said. "Stop the ash."
Vin snorted
quietly. "You make it sound like a joke."
"No, I'm
serious," he said, standing. "If this is what you feel you
must do—what you feel that you are—then let's do it. I'll
help however I can."
"What about
your speech before?" Vin said. "In the last storage
cavern—you talked about division of labor. Me working on the
mists, you working on uniting the empire."
"I was wrong."
Vin smiled, and
suddenly Elend felt as if the world had been put back together just a
bit.
"So,"
Elend said, sitting on the bed beside her. "What have you got?
Any thoughts?"
Vin paused. "Yes,"
she said. "But I can't tell you."
Elend frowned.
"It's not that
I don't trust you," Vin said. "It's Ruin. In the last
storage cavern, I found a second inscription on the plate, down near
the bottom. It warned me that anything I speak—or that I
write—will be known by our enemy. So, if we talk too much, he
will know our plans."
"That makes it
a bit difficult to work on the problem together."
Vin took his hands.
"Elend, do you know why I finally agreed to marry you?"
Elend shook his
head.
"Because I
realized that you trusted me," Vin said. "Trusted me as
nobody ever has before. On that night, when I fought Zane, I decided
that I had to give my trust to you. This force that's destroying the
world, we have something that it can never understand. I don't
necessarily need your help; I need your trust. Your hope. It's
something I've never had of myself, and I rely on yours."
Elend nodded
slowly. "You have it."
"Thank you."
"You know,"
Elend added, "during those days when you refused to marry me, I
constantly thought about how strange you were."
She raised an
eyebrow. "Well, that's romantic."
Elend smiled. "Oh,
come on. You have to admit that you're unusual, Vin. You're like some
strange mixture of a noblewoman, a street urchin, and a cat. Plus,
you've managed—in our short three years together—to kill
not only my god, but my father, my brother, and my fiancée.
That's kind of like a homicidal hat trick. It's a strange foundation
for a relationship, wouldn't you say?"
Vin just rolled her
eyes.
"I'm just glad
I don't have any other close relatives," Elend said. Then, he
eyed her. "Except for you, of course."
"I'm not about
to drown myself, if that's what you're getting at."
"No,"
Elend said. "I'm sorry. I'm just . . . well, you know. Anyway, I
was explaining something. In the end, I stopped worrying about how
strange you seemed. I realized that it didn't really matter
if I understood you, because I trusted you. Does that make sense?
Either way, I guess I'm saying that I agree. I don't really know what
you're doing, and I don't have any clue how you're going to achieve
it. But, well, I trust that you'll do it."
Vin pulled close to
him.
"I just wish
there were something I could do to help," Elend said.
"Then take the
whole numbers part," Vin said, frowning distastefully. Though
she'd been the one to think something was odd about the percentages
of those who fell to the mists, Elend knew that she found numbers
troublesome. She didn't have the training, or the practice, to deal
with them.
"You're sure
that's even related?" Elend asked.
"You were the
one who thought that the percentages were so strange."
"Good point.
All right, I'll work on it."
"Just don't
tell me what you discover," Vin said.
"Well, how is
that going to help anything?"
"Trust,"
Vin said. "You can tell me what to do, just don't tell me why.
Maybe we can stay ahead of this thing."
Stay ahead of
it? Elend thought. It has the power to bury the entire
empire in ash, and can apparently hear every single word we say. How
do we "stay ahead" of something like that? But, he had
just promised to trust Vin, so he did so.
Vin pointed at the
table. "Is that your letter to Yomen?"
Elend nodded. "I'm
hoping that he'll talk to me, now that I'm actually here."
"Slowswift
does seem to think that Yomen is a good man. Maybe he'll listen."
"Somehow, I
doubt it," Elend said. He sat softly for a moment, then made a
fist, gritting his teeth in frustration. "I told the others that
I want to try diplomacy, but I know that Yomen is going to
reject my message. That's why I brought my army in the first place—I
could have just sent you to sneak in, like you did in Urteau.
However, sneaking in didn't help us much there; we still have to
secure the city if we want the supplies.
"We need
this city. Even if you hadn't felt so driven to discover what was in
the cache, I would have come here. The threat Yomen poses to our
kingdom is too strong, and the possibility that the Lord Ruler left
important information in that cache can't be ignored. Yomen has grain
in that storage, but the land here won't get enough sunlight to grow
it. So, he'll probably feed it to the people—a waste, when we
don't have enough to plant and fill the Central Dominance. We have to
take this city, or at least make an ally out of it.
"But, what do
I do if Yomen won't talk? Send armies to attack nearby villages?
Poison the city's supplies? If you're right, then he's found the
cache, which means he'll have more food than we hoped. Unless we
destroy that, he might outlast our siege. But, if I do destroy it,
his people will starve . . ." Elend shook his head. "Do you
remember when I executed Jastes?"
"That was well
within your right," Vin said quickly.
"I believe it
was," Elend said. "But I killed him because he led a group
of koloss to my city, then let them ravage my people. I've nearly
done the same thing here. There are twenty thousand of the beasts
outside."
"You can
control them."
"Jastes
thought he could control them too," Elend said. "I don't
want to turn those creatures loose, Vin. But what if the siege fails,
and I have to try and break Yomen's fortifications? I won't be able
to do that without the koloss." He shook his head. "If only
I could talk to Yomen. Perhaps I could make him see reason,
or at least convince myself that he needs to fall."
Vin paused. "There
. . . might be a way."
Elend glanced over,
catching her eyes.
"They're still
staging balls inside the city," Vin said. "And King Yomen
attends every one."
Elend blinked. At
first, he assumed that he must have misunderstood her. However, the
look in her eyes—that wild determination—persuaded him
otherwise. Sometimes, he saw a touch of the Survivor in her; or, at
least, of the man the stories claimed Kelsier had been. Bold to the
point of recklessness. Brave and brash. He'd rubbed off on Vin more
than she liked to admit.
"Vin," he
said flatly, "did you just suggest that we attend a ball
being held in the middle of a city we're besieging?"
Vin shrugged.
"Sure. Why not? We're both Mistborn—we can get into that
city without much trouble at all."
"Yes, but . .
." He trailed off.
I'd have a room
filled with the very nobility I'm hoping to intimidate —not
to mention have access to the man who refuses to meet with me, in a
situation where he'd have trouble running away without looking like a
coward.
"You think
it's a good idea," Vin said, smiling impishly.
"It's a crazy
idea," Elend said. "I'm emperor—I shouldn't be
sneaking into the enemy city so I can go to a party."
Vin narrowed her
eyes, staring at him.
"I will admit,
however," Elend said, "that the concept does have
considerable charm."
"Yomen won't
come meet us," Vin said, "so we go in and crash his party."
"It's been a
while since I've been to a ball," Elend said speculatively.
"I'll have to dig up some good reading material for old time's
sake."
Suddenly, Vin grew
pale. Elend paused, glancing at her, sensing that something was
wrong. Not with what he'd said, something else. What is it?
Assassins? Mist spirits? Koloss?
"I just
realized something," Vin said, looking at him with those intense
eyes of hers. "I can't go to a ball—I didn't bring a
gown!"

The Lord Ruler
didn't just forbid certain technologies, he suppressed technological
advancement completely. It seems odd now that during the entirety of
his thousand-year reign, very little progress was made. Farming
techniques, architectural methods —even fashion
remained remarkably stable during the Lord Ruler's reign.
He constructed
his perfect empire, then tried to make it stay that way. For the most
part, he was successful. Pocket watches —another
Khlenni appropriation —that were made in the tenth
century of the empire were nearly identical to those made during the
first. Everything stayed the same.
Until it all
collapsed, of course.





29
LIKE MOST
CITIES IN THE FINAL EMPIRE, Urteau had been forbidden a city
wall. In the early days of Sazed's life, before he'd rebelled, the
fact that cities couldn't build fortifications had always seemed a
subtle indication to him of the Lord Ruler's vulnerability. After
all, if the Lord Ruler was worried about rebellions and cities that
could stand against him, then perhaps he knew something that nobody
else did: that he could be defeated.
Thoughts like those
had led Sazed to Mare, and finally to Kelsier. And now, they led him
to the city of Urteau—a city that finally had rebelled
against noble leadership. Unfortunately, it lumped Elend Venture in
with all the other nobles.
"I don't like
this, Master Keeper," Captain Goradel said, walking beside
Sazed, who—for the sake of his image—now rode in the
carriage with Breeze and Allrianne. After leaving the Terris people
behind, Sazed had hurriedly caught up with Breeze and the others, and
they were finally entering the city that was their destination.
"Things are
supposed to be kind of brutal in there," Goradel continued. "I
don't think you'll be safe."
"I doubt it's
as bad as you think," Sazed said.
"What if they
take you captive?" Goradel asked.
"My dear man,"
Breeze said, leaning forward to look out at Goradel. "That's why
kings send ambassadors. This way, if someone gets captured,
the king is still safe. We, my friend, are something Elend can never
be: expendable."
Goradel frowned at
that. "I don't feel very expendable."
Sazed peered out of
the carriage, looking at the city through the falling ash. It was
large, and was one of the oldest cities in the empire. He noted with
interest that as they approached, the road sloped downward, entering
an empty canal trough.
"What's this?"
Allrianne asked, sticking her blond head out of the other side of the
carriage. "Why'd they build their roads in ditches?"
"Canals, my
dear," Breeze said. "The city used to be filled with them.
Now they're empty—an earthquake or something diverted a river."
"It's creepy,"
she said, bringing her head back in. "It makes the buildings
look twice as tall."
As they entered the
city proper—their two hundred soldiers marching around them in
formation—they were met by a delegation of Urteau soldiers in
brown uniforms. Sazed had sent word ahead of their coming, of course,
and the king—the Citizen, they called him—had given Sazed
leave to bring his small contingent of troops into the city.
"They say that
their king wants to meet with you immediately, Master Terrisman,"
Goradel said, walking back to the carriage.
"The man
doesn't waste time, does he?" Breeze asked.
"We'll go,
then," Sazed said, nodding to Goradel.
"You aren't
wanted here."
Quellion, the
Citizen, was a short-haired man with rough skin and an almost
military bearing. Sazed wondered where the man—apparently a
simple farmer before the Collapse—had gained such leadership
skills.
"I realize
that you have no desire to see foreign soldiers in your city,"
Sazed said carefully. "However, you must have realized that we
do not come to conquer. Two hundred men is hardly an invading force."
Quellion stood at
his desk, arms clasped behind his back. He wore what appeared to be
regular skaa trousers and shirt, though both had been dyed a deep red
verging on maroon. His "audience chamber" was a large
conference room in what had once been a nobleman's house. The walls
had been whitewashed and the chandelier removed. Stripped of its
furniture and finery, the room felt like a box.
Sazed, Breeze, and
Allrianne sat on hard wooden stools, the only comfort the Citizen had
offered them. Goradel stood at the back with ten of his soldiers as a
guard.
"It isn't
about the soldiers, Terrisman," Quellion said. "It's about
the man who sent you."
"Emperor
Venture is a good and reasonable monarch," Sazed said.
Quellion snorted,
turning to one of his companions. He had many of these—perhaps
twenty—and Sazed assumed they were members of his government.
Most wore red, like Quellion, though their clothing hadn't been dyed
as deeply.
"Elend
Venture," Quellion said, raising a finger, turning back to
Sazed, "is a liar and a tyrant."
"That isn't
true."
"Oh?"
Quellion asked. "And how did he gain his throne? By defeating
Straff Venture and Ashweather Cett in war?"
"War was—"
"War is often
the excuse of tyrants, Terrisman," Quellion said. "My
reports said that his Mistborn wife forced the kings to kneel before
him that day—forced them to swear their loyalty to him or be
slaughtered by his koloss brutes. Does that sound like the actions of
a 'good and reasonable' man?"
Sazed didn't
respond.
Quellion stepped
forward, laying both hands palm-down on the top of his desk. "Do
you know what we've done to the noblemen in this city, Terrisman?"
"You've killed
them," Sazed said quietly.
"Just as the
Survivor ordered," Quellion said. "You claim to have been
his companion, before the fall. Yet, you serve one of the very noble
houses he sought to overthrow. Doesn't that strike you as
inconsistent, Terrisman?"
"Lord Kelsier
accomplished his purpose in the death of the Lord Ruler," Sazed
said. "Once that was achieved, peace—"
"Peace?"
Quellion asked. "Tell me, Terrisman. Did you ever hear the
Survivor speak of peace?"
Sazed hesitated.
"No," he admitted.
Quellion snorted.
"At least you're honest. The only reason I'm talking to you is
because Venture was clever enough to send a Terrisman. If he'd sent a
nobleman, I would have killed the cur and sent his blackened skull
back as an answer."
The room fell
silent. Tense. After a few moments of waiting, Quellion turned his
back on Sazed, facing his companions. "You sense that?" he
asked his men. "Can you feel yourselves begin to feel ashamed?
Look at your emotions—do you suddenly feel a fellowship with
these servants of a liar?"
He turned back,
glancing at Breeze. "I've warned you all of Allomancy, the black
tool of the nobility. Well, now you get to feel it. That man—sitting
beside our distinguished Terrisman—is known as Breeze.
He's one of the world's most vile men. A Soother of no small skill."
Quellion turned to
address Breeze. "Tell me, Soother. How many friends have your
magics made for you? How many enemies have you forced to kill
themselves? That pretty girl beside you—did you use your arts
to hex her into your bed?"
Breeze smiled,
raising his cup of wine. "My dear man, you have, of course,
found me out. However, instead of congratulating yourself for
noticing my touch, perhaps you should ask yourself why I manipulated
you into saying what you just did."
Quellion
paused—though, of course, Breeze was bluffing. Sazed sighed. An
indignant reaction would have been far more appropriate—but,
then, that wasn't Breeze's way. Now the Citizen would spend the rest
of the meeting wondering if his words were being guided by Breeze.
"Master
Quellion," Sazed said, "these are dangerous times. Surely
you have noticed that."
"We can
protect ourselves well enough," Quellion said.
"I'm not
speaking of armies or bandits, Citizen. I'm speaking of mists and
ash. Have you noticed that the mists are lingering longer and longer
during the daylight hours? Have you noticed them doing strange things
to your people, causing the deaths of some who go out?"
Quellion did not
contradict him or call his words foolish. That told Sazed enough.
People had died in this city.
"The ash falls
perpetually, Citizen," Sazed said. "The mists are deadly,
and the koloss run free. This would be a very good time to have
powerful alliances. In the Central Dominance, we can grow better
crops, for we get more sunlight. Emperor Venture has discovered a
method of controlling the koloss. Whatever is to come in the next few
years, it would be very advantageous to be Emperor Venture's friend."
Quellion shook his
head, as if in resignation. He turned to his companions again. "You
see—just as I told you. First, he tells us he comes in peace,
then he moves on to threats. Venture controls the koloss. Venture
controls the food. Next he'll be saying that Venture controls the
mists!" Quellion turned back to Sazed. "We don't have any
use for threats here, Terrisman. We aren't worried about our future."
Sazed raised an
eyebrow. "And why is that?"
"Because we
follow the Survivor," Quellion said. "Be gone from my
sight."
Sazed stood. "I
would like to stay in the city and perhaps meet with you again."
"That meeting
will not happen."
"Regardless,"
Sazed said. "I would prefer to stay. You have my promise that my
men will not cause trouble. Might I have your leave?" He bowed
his head in deference.
Quellion muttered
something under his breath before waving a hand at him. "If I
forbid you, then you'll just sneak in. Stay if you must, Terrisman,
but I warn you—follow our laws and do not make trouble."
Sazed bowed
further, then retreated with his people.
"Well,"
Breeze said, settling back into the carriage, "murderous
revolutionaries, everybody wearing the same gray clothing, ditch-like
streets where every tenth building has been burned to the ground.
This is a lovely place Elend chose for us to visit—remind me to
thank him upon our return."
Sazed smiled,
though he felt little humor.
"Oh, don't
look so grim, old man," Breeze said, waving with his cane as the
carriage began to roll, their soldiers surrounding it. "Something
tells me that Quellion there isn't half as threatening as his bearing
implies. We'll convince him eventually."
"I'm not
certain, Lord Breeze. This place . . . it's different from the other
cities we've visited. The leaders aren't as desperate, and the people
are more subservient. We won't have an easy time of it here, I
think."
Allrianne poked
Breeze's arm. "Breezy, do you see that, over there?"
Breeze squinted
against the light, and Sazed leaned forward, glancing out the side of
the carriage. A group of people had created a bonfire in the
courtyard. The massive blaze sent a twisting line of smoke into the
air. Sazed reflexively looked for a tinmind to draw upon and enhance
his vision. He shoved the impulse aside, instead squinting against
the afternoon light.
"It looks like
. . ."
"Tapestries,"
said one of their soldiers, marching at the side of the carriage.
"And furniture—rich things that are signs of the nobility,
according to the Citizen. The burning was staged for your benefit, of
course. Quellion probably keeps storehouses of the stuff so that he
can order them burned at dramatically appropriate times."
Sazed froze. The
soldier was remarkably well informed. Sazed looked closely,
suspicious. Like all of their men, this one wore his cloak hood up
against the falling ash. As the man turned his head, Sazed could see
that—oddly—he wore a thick bandage tied across his eyes,
as if he were blind. Despite that, Sazed recognized the face.
"Spook, my
dear boy!" Breeze exclaimed. "I knew you'd turn up
eventually. Why the blindfold?"
Spook didn't answer
the question. Instead, he turned, glancing back at the burning flames
of the bonfire. There seemed a . . . tension to his posture.
The cloth must
be thin enough to see through , Sazed thought. That was the only
explanation for the way Spook moved with ease and grace, despite the
cloth. Though, it certainly seemed thick enough to be obscuring. . .
.
Spook turned back
to Sazed. "You're going to need a base of operations in the
city. Have you chosen one yet?"
Breeze shook his
head. "We were thinking of using an inn."
"There aren't
any true inns in the city," Spook said. "Quellion says that
citizens should care for one another, letting visitors stay in each
other's homes."
"Hmm,"
Breeze said. "Perhaps we'll need to camp outside."
Spook shook his
head. "No. Follow me."
"The Ministry
Canton of Inquisition?" Sazed asked, frowning as he climbed out
of the carriage.
Spook stood ahead
of them, on the steps leading into the grand building. He turned,
nodding his strange, cloth-wrapped head. "Quellion hasn't
touched any of the Ministry buildings. He ordered them boarded up,
but he didn't ransack or burn them. I think he's afraid of
Inquisitors."
"A healthy and
rational fear, my boy," Breeze said, still sitting inside the
carriage.
Spook snorted. "The
Inquisitors aren't going to bother us, Breeze. They're far too busy
trying to kill Vin. Come on."
He walked up the
steps, and Sazed followed. Behind, he could hear Breeze sigh with an
exaggerated sound, then call for one of the soldiers to bring a
parasol against the ash.
The building was
broad and imposing, like most Ministry offices. During the days of
the Lord Ruler, these buildings had stood as reminders of imperial
might in every city across the Final Empire. The priests who had
filled them had mostly been bureaucrats and clerks—but, then,
that had been the real power of the Final Empire. Its control of
resources and management of people.
Spook stood beside
the building's broad, boarded-up doors. Like most structures in
Urteau, it was built of wood, rather than stone. He stared up, as if
watching the falling ash, as he waited for Sazed and Breeze. He had
always been a quiet one, even more so since his uncle's death during
the assault on Luthadel. As Sazed arrived, Spook began to rip boards
free from the front of the building. "I'm glad you're here,
Sazed," he said.
Sazed moved to help
pull off boards. He heaved, trying to get the nails undone—yet,
he must have chosen one of the more stubborn boards, for though the
ones Spook grabbed came free with ease, Sazed's refused to even
budge. "And why is it you're glad I am here, Lord Spook?"
Spook snorted. "I'm
no lord, Saze. Never did get Elend to give me a title."
Sazed smiled. "He
said that you only wanted one to impress women."
"Of course I
did," Spook said, smiling as he ripped free another board. "What
other reason would there be to have a title? Anyway, please just call
me Spook. It's a good name."
"Very well."
Spook reached over,
using a single, casual hand to pull off the board Sazed had tried to
budge. What? Sazed thought with shock. Sazed was by no means
muscular—but, then, he hadn't thought that Spook was either.
The lad must have been practicing with weights.
"Anyway,"
Spook said, turning, "I'm glad you're here, because I have
things to discuss with you. Things that others might not understand."
Sazed frowned.
"Things of what nature?"
Spook smiled, then
threw his shoulder against the door, opening it into a dark,
cavernous chamber. "Things of gods and men, Sazed. Come on."
The boy disappeared
into the darkness. Sazed waited outside, but Spook never lit a
lantern. He could hear the young man moving around inside.
"Spook?"
he finally called out. "I can't see in there. Do you have a
lantern?"
There was a pause.
"Oh," Spook's voice said. "Right." A moment
later, a light sparked, and a lantern began to glow.
Breeze sauntered up
behind Sazed. "Tell me, Sazed," he said quietly, "is
it me, or has that boy changed since we last saw him?"
"He seems far
more self-confident," Sazed said, nodding to himself. "More
capable as well. But, what do you suppose is the purpose of that
blindfold?"
Breeze shrugged,
taking Allrianne's arm. "He always was an odd one. Perhaps he
thinks it will disguise him and help keep him from being recognized
as a member of Kelsier's crew. Considering the improvement in the
boy's disposition—and diction—I'm willing to deal with a
quirk or two."
Breeze and
Allrianne entered the building, and Sazed waved to Captain Goradel,
indicating that he should make a perimeter outside. The man nodded,
sending a squad of soldiers up to follow Sazed and the others.
Finally, Sazed frowned to himself and entered the building.
He wasn't certain
what he had been expecting. The building had been part of the Canton
of Inquisition—the most infamous of the Ministry's arms. It
wasn't a place Sazed relished entering. The last building like this
he'd entered had been the Conventical of Seran, and it had been
decidedly eerie. This building, however, proved to be nothing like
the Conventical—it was just another bureaucratic office. It was
furnished a little more austerely than most Ministry buildings, true,
but it still had tapestries on the wooden walls and broad red rugs on
the floor. The trim was of metal, and there were hearths in every
room.
As Sazed followed
Breeze and Spook through the building, he was able to imagine what
the building had been like during the days of the Lord Ruler. There
would have been no dust, then, but instead an air of crisp
efficiency. Administrators would have sat at those desks, collecting
and filing information about noble houses, skaa rebels, and even
other Ministry Cantons. There had been a longstanding feud between
the Canton of Orthodoxy, which had administered the Lord Ruler's
empire, and the Canton of Inquisition, which had policed it.
This was not a
place of fear at all, but rather a place of ledgers and files. The
Inquisitors had probably visited this building only rarely. Spook led
them through several cluttered rooms toward a smaller storage chamber
at the back. Here, Sazed could see that the dust on the floor had
been disturbed.
"You've been
here before?" he asked, entering the room after Spook, Breeze,
and Allrianne.
Spook nodded. "As
has Vin. Don't you remember the report?" With that, he felt
about on the floor, eventually finding a hidden latch and opening a
trapdoor. Sazed peered down into the dark cavern below.
"What's he
talking about?" Allrianne whispered to Breeze. "Vin's been
here?"
"She did
reconnaissance in this city, dear," Breeze said. "To find .
. ."
"The cache,"
Sazed said as Spook began to climb down a ladder into the darkness.
He left the lantern behind. "The supply cache left behind by the
Lord Ruler. All of them are underneath Ministry buildings."
"Well, that's
what we're here to recover, isn't it?" Allrianne asked. "So,
we've got it. Why bother with that Citizen fellow and his crazy
peasants?"
"There's no
way we could get these supplies out of the city with the Citizen in
control." Spook's voice drifted up, echoing slightly. "There's
too much down here."
"Besides, my
dear," Breeze said. "Elend didn't just send us to get these
supplies—he sent us to quell a rebellion. We can't have one of
our major cities in revolt, and we particularly can't afford
to let the rebellion spread. I must say, though, it does feel odd to
be on this side of the problem—stopping a rebellion, rather
than starting one."
"We may have
to organize a rebellion against the rebellion, Breeze,"
Spook's voice echoed from below. "If that makes you feel any
more comfortable. Anyway, are you three coming down or not?"
Sazed and Breeze
shared a look, then Breeze gestured toward the dark pit. "After
you."
Sazed picked up the
lantern and climbed down the ladder. At the bottom, he found a small
stone chamber, one wall of which had been pulled back to reveal a
cavern. He stepped inside, Breeze reaching the ground behind him,
then helping Allrianne down.
Sazed raised the
lantern, staring quietly.
"Lord Ruler!"
Breeze said, stepping up beside him. "It's enormous!"
"The Lord
Ruler prepared these caches in case of a disaster," Spook said,
standing ahead of them in the cavern. "They were meant to help
the empire through what we're now facing. They wouldn't be much good
if they weren't created on a grand scale."
"Grand"
was correct. They stood on a ledge near the ceiling of the cavern,
and a vast chamber extended out below. Sazed could see row upon row
of shelves lining the cavern floor.
"I think we
should set up our base here, Sazed," Spook said, moving toward
stairs that led down to the cavern floor. "It's the only
defensible place in the city. If we move our troops into the building
above, we can use this cavern for supplies—and can even fall
back in here in an emergency. We could defend this even against a
determined assault."
Sazed turned,
regarding the stone doorway into the chamber. It was small enough
that only one man could pass through at a time—which meant that
it would be very easy to guard. And, there was probably a way to shut
it again.
"Suddenly I
feel a whole lot safer in this city," Breeze noted.
Sazed nodded. He
turned, regarding the cavern again. In the distance, he could hear
something. "Is that water?"
Spook was moving
down steps. Again, his voice echoed hauntingly in the chamber. "Each
cache has a specialty—something it contains more of than all
the others."
Sazed moved down
the steps as Goradel's soldiers entered the chamber behind Breeze.
Though the soldiers had brought more lanterns, Breeze and Allrianne
stuck close to Sazed as they descended.
Soon, Sazed
realized he could see something sparkling in the distance. He held
the lantern high, pausing on the steps as he saw that some of the
darkness in the distance was too flat to be part of the cavern floor.
Breeze whistled
quietly as they studied the enormous underground lake. "Well,"
he noted, "I guess now we know where all the water from those
canals went."

Originally, men
assumed that Rashek's persecution of the Terris religion came from
hatred. Yet, now that we know that Rashek was himself a Terrisman,
his destruction of that religion seems odd. I suspect it had
something to do with the prophecies about the Hero of Ages. Rashek
knew that Preservation's power would eventually return to the Well of
Ascension. If the Terris religion had been allowed to survive, then
perhaps—someday—a person would find their way to the Well
and take up the power, then use it to defeat Rashek and overthrow his
empire. So, he obscured knowledge of the Hero and what he was
supposed to do, hoping to keep the secret of the Well to himself.





30
"YOU'RE
NOT GOING TO TRY AND TALK me out of this?" Elend asked,
amused.
Ham and Cett shared
a look.
"Why would we
do that, El?" Ham asked, standing at the front of the boat. In
the distance, the sun was setting, and the mists had already begun to
gather. The boat rocked quietly, and soldiers milled about on the
shore, preparing for night. One week had passed since Vin's initial
scouting of Fadrex, and she still hadn't managed to sneak into the
storage cache.
The night of the
next ball had arrived, and Elend and Vin were planning to attend.
"Well, I can
think of a couple of reasons why you might object," Elend said,
counting them off on his fingers. "First, it isn't wise to
expose me to potential capture. Second, by revealing myself at the
party, I'll show that I'm Mistborn, confirming rumors that Yomen may
not believe. Third, I'll be putting both of our Mistborn in the same
place, where they can be easily attacked—that can't be a good
idea. Finally, there's the fact that going to a ball in the middle of
a war is just plain crazy."
Ham shrugged,
leaning with one elbow against the deck railing. "This isn't so
different from when you entered your father's camp during the siege
of Luthadel. Except you weren't Mistborn then, and you weren't in
such a position of political power. Yomen would be crazy to make a
move against you—he has to know that if you're in the same room
with him, he's in mortal danger himself."
"He'll run,"
Cett said from his seat. "This party will end the moment you
arrive."
"No,"
Elend said, "I don't think it will." He glanced back toward
their cabin. Vin was still getting ready—she'd had the camp
tailors modify one of the cooking girls' dresses. Elend was worried.
No matter how good the dress turned out to be, it would look out of
place compared to the lavish ball gowns.
He turned back to
Cett and Ham. "I don't think Yomen will run. He has to know that
if Vin wanted to kill him, she'd attack his palace in secret. He's
trying very hard to pretend that nothing has changed since the Lord
Ruler disappeared. When we show up at the ball, it will make him
think that we're willing to pretend with him. He'll stay and see if
he can gain some advantage by meeting with us on his terms."
"The man's a
fool," Cett said. "I can't believe he'd want to go back to
the way things were."
"At least he's
trying to give his subjects what they want. That's where you went
wrong, Cett. You lost your kingdom the moment you left because you
didn't care to try pleasing anyone."
"A king
doesn't have to please anyone," Cett snapped. "He's the one
with the army—that means other people have to please him."
"Actually,"
Ham said, rubbing his chin, "that theory can't be true. A king
has to please somebody—after all, even if he intended to force
everyone to do what he said, he'd still have to at least please his
army. But then, I guess if the army is pleased simply by being
allowed to push people around, you might have an argument . . ."
Ham trailed off,
looking thoughtful, and Cett scowled. "Does everything have to
be some damn logic puzzle to you?" he demanded. Ham just
continued to rub his chin.
Elend smiled,
glancing at his cabin again. It was good to hear Ham acting like
himself. Cett protested Ham's comments almost as much as Breeze did.
In fact . . . Maybe that's why Ham hasn't been quite so prone to
his little logic puzzles lately, Elend thought. There hasn't
been anyone around to complain about them.
"So, Elend . .
." Cett said. "If you die, I'm in charge, right?"
"Vin will take
command if something happens to me," Elend said. "You know
that."
"Right,"
Cett said. "And if both of you die?"
"Sazed is next
in the imperial succession after Vin, Cett. We've discussed that."
"Yes, but what
about this army?" Cett said. "Sazed is off in Urteau. Who
leads these men until we meet up with him?"
Elend sighed. "If,
somehow, Yomen manages to kill both Vin and myself, then I suggest
that you run—because yes, you'd be in charge here, and the
Mistborn who killed us is likely to come for you next."
Cett smiled in
satisfaction, though Ham frowned at this.
"You've never
wanted titles, Ham," Elend pointed out. "And you've chafed
at every leadership position I've given you."
"I know,"
he said. "But what about Demoux?"
"Cett has more
experience," Elend said. "He's a better man than he
pretends, Ham. I trust him. That will have to be enough for you.
Cett, if things turn bad, I charge you with returning to Luthadel and
searching out Sazed to tell him that he's emperor. Now, I think
that—"
Elend paused as the
door to his cabin opened. He turned, putting on his best consoling
smile, then froze.
Vin stood in the
doorway wearing a stunning black gown with silver trim, cut after a
modern fashion. Somehow, it managed to look sleek despite the
bell-shaped skirt, which fanned out with petticoats. Her pure black
hair, which she often wore pulled back in a tail, was down, and it
now reached to her collarbone, neatly trimmed and curling just
slightly. The only jewelry she wore was her simple earring, the one
she'd gotten from her mother when she was just a child.
He always thought
she was beautiful. And yet . . . how long had it been since he'd seen
her in a gown, with her hair and makeup done? He tried to say
something, give her a compliment, but his voice just kind of trailed
off.
She walked over on
light feet, kissing him briefly. "I'll take that as an
indication that I managed to put this thing on right. I'd forgotten
what a pain gowns could be. And the makeup! Honestly, Elend,
you're never allowed to complain about those suits of yours again."
Beside them, Ham
was chuckling. Vin turned. "What?"
"Ah, Vin,"
Ham said, leaning back and folding his muscular arms, "when did
you go and grow up on me? It seems like just last week you were
scrambling about, hiding in corners, wearing the haircut of a boy and
the attitude of a mouse."
Vin smiled fondly.
"Do you remember when we first met? You thought I was a twixt."
Ham nodded. "Breeze
nearly fainted dead away when he found we'd been talking with a
Mistborn all that time! Honestly, Vin. Sometimes I can't believe that
you were that same frightened girl Kelsier brought into the crew."
"It has
been five years, Ham. I'm twenty-one now."
"I know,"
Ham said, sighing. "You're like my own children, adults before I
had time to know them as kids. In fact, I probably know you and El
better than I know any of them . . ."
"You'll get
back to them, Ham," Vin said, reaching over and laying a hand on
his shoulder. "Once this is all over."
"Oh, I know
that," he said, smiling, ever the optimist. "But, you can
never have back what you've missed. I hope all this turns out to be
worth it."
Elend shook his
head, finally finding his voice. "I have only one thing to say.
If that dress is what the cooking girls are wearing, I'm paying them
far too much."
Vin laughed.
"Seriously,
Vin," Elend said. "The army's tailors are good, but there's
no way that dress came from materials we had in camp. Where did you
get it?"
"It's a
mystery," Vin said, narrowing her eyes and smiling. "We
Mistborn are incredibly mysterious."
Elend paused. "Um
. . . I'm Mistborn too, Vin. That doesn't make any sense."
"We Mistborn
need not make sense," Vin said. "It's beneath us. Come
on—the sun's already down. We need to get moving."
"Have fun
dancing with our enemies," Ham said as Vin hopped from the boat,
then Pushed herself up through the mists. Elend waved farewell,
Pushing himself into the air as well. As he shot away, his
tin-enhanced ears heard Ham's voice talking to Cett.
"So . . . you
can't go anywhere unless someone carries you, right?" the Thug
asked.
Cett grunted.
"Well then,"
Ham said, sounding very pleased. "I've got quite a number of
philosophical puzzles you might enjoy. . . ."
Allomantic jumping
was not easy when one was wearing a ball gown. Every time
Vin started to descend, the bottom of the dress flared up around her,
ruffling and flapping like a flock of startled birds.
Vin wasn't
particularly worried about showing off what was under the dress. Not
only was it too dark for most people to see, but she wore leggings
beneath the petticoats. Unfortunately, flapping dresses—and the
drag they created in the air—made steering a jump much more
difficult. They also made a lot of noise. She wondered what the
guards thought as she passed over the rocky shelves that were the
natural city walls. To her ear, she sounded like a dozen waving
flags, beating against themselves in the middle of a windstorm.
She finally slowed,
aiming for a rooftop that had been cleared of ash. She hit lightly,
bouncing up and spinning, dress flaring, before landing and waiting
for Elend. He followed, landing less smoothly with a hard thump and a
grunt. It wasn't that he was bad at Pushing and Pulling—he just
hadn't had as much practice as Vin. She'd probably been much like him
during her first years as an Allomancer.
Well . . .
maybe not like him, she thought fondly as Elend dusted himself
off. But, I'm sure a lot of other Allomancers were about at
Elend's level after only a year of practice.
"That was
quite the series of jumps, Vin," Elend said, puffing slightly as
he glanced back toward the cliff-like rock formations, their fires
burning high in the night. Elend wore his standard white military
uniform, one of the same ones that Tindwyl had designed for him. He'd
had this one scrubbed free of ash, and he'd gotten his beard trimmed.
"I couldn't
land often," Vin explained. "These white petticoats will
stain with ash easily. Come on—we need to get inside."
Elend turned,
smiling in the darkness. He actually looked excited. "The dress.
You paid a dressmaker inside the city to make it for you?"
"Actually, I
paid a friend inside the city to have it made for me, and to get me
the makeup." She jumped away, heading toward Keep Orielle—which,
according to Slowswift, was the site of the evening's ball. She kept
to the air, never landing. Elend followed behind, using the same
coins.
Soon, they
approached a burst of color in the mists, like an aurora from one of
Sazed's stories. The bubble of light turned into the massive keep she
had seen during her previous infiltration, its stained-glass windows
shining from the inside. Vin angled herself downward, streaking
through the mists. She briefly considered dropping to the ground out
in the courtyard—away from watchful eyes—so that she and
Elend could approach the doors subtly. Then she decided against it.
This wasn't an
evening for subtlety.
So, instead she
dropped directly down onto the carpeted steps leading up to the main
entrance of the castle-like building. Her landing blew away flakes of
ash, creating a little pocket of cleanliness. Elend landed beside her
a second later, then stood up straight, his brilliant white cape
flapping around him. At the top of the steps, a pair of uniformed
servants had been greeting guests and ushering them into the
building. Both men froze, stunned expressions on their faces.
Elend held out his
arm to Vin. "Shall we?"
Vin took the arm.
"Yes," she said. "Preferably before those men can get
the guards."
They strode up the
steps, sounds of surprise coming from behind, where a small group of
noblemen had been exiting their carriage. Ahead, one of the servants
moved forward and cut off Vin and Elend. Elend carefully placed a
hand against the man's chest, then shoved him aside with a
pewter-fueled push. The man stumbled backward into the wall. The
other one went running for the guards.
Inside the
antechamber, waiting nobility began to whisper and question. Vin
heard them asking if anyone recognized these strange newcomers, one
in black, the other in white. Elend strode forward firmly, Vin at his
side, causing people to stumble over themselves and move out of the
way. Elend and Vin passed quickly through the small room, and Elend
handed a name card to a servant who waited to announce arrivals into
the ballroom proper.
They waited on the
servant, and Vin realized that she'd begun holding her breath. It
seemed as if she were reliving a dream—or was it a fond memory?
For a moment, she was that same young girl of over four years before,
arriving at Keep Venture for her very first ball, nervous and worried
that she wouldn't be able to play her part.
Yet, she felt none
of that same insecurity. She didn't worry if she'd find acceptance or
belief. She'd slain the Lord Ruler. She'd married Elend Venture.
And—more remarkable than either accomplishment—somehow in
the chaos and mess she'd discovered who she was. Not a girl of the
streets, though that was where she'd been raised. Not a woman of the
court, though she appreciated the beauty and grace of the balls.
Someone else.
Someone she liked.
The servant reread
Elend's card, growing pale. He looked up. Elend met the man's eyes,
then gave a small nod, as if to say, "Yes, I'm afraid that it's
true."
The servant cleared
his throat, and Elend led Vin into the ballroom.
"High Emperor,
Lord Elend Venture," the servant announced in a clear voice.
"And the Empress Vin Venture, Heir of the Survivor, Hero of
Ages."
The entire ballroom
grew suddenly—and unnaturally—quiet. Vin and Elend paused
at the front of the room, giving the gathered nobility a chance to
see them. It appeared that Keep Orielle's grand main hall, like Keep
Venture's, was also its ballroom. However, instead of being tall with
a broad, arched roof, this room had a relatively low ceiling and
small, intricate designs in the stonework. It was as if the architect
had tried for beauty on a delicate scale, rather than an imposing
one.
The entire chamber
was crafted from white marble of various shades. While it was large
enough to hold hundreds of people—plus a dance floor and
tables—it still felt intimate. The room was divided by rows of
ornamental marble pillars, and it was further partitioned with large
stained-glass panels that ran from floor to ceiling. Vin was
impressed—most keeps in Luthadel left their stained glass to
the perimeter walls, so they could be lit from outside. While this
keep did have some of those, she quickly realized that the true
masterpieces had been placed here, freestanding inside the ballroom,
where they could be admired from both sides.
"By the Lord
Ruler," Elend whispered, scanning the gathered people. "They
really do think they can just ignore the rest of the world,
don't they?"
Gold, silver,
bronze, and brass sparkled upon figures in brilliant ball gowns and
sharp gentlemen's suits. The men generally wore dark clothing, and
the women generally wore colors. A group of musicians played strings
in a far corner, their music unimpeded by the shocked atmosphere.
Servants waited, uncertain, bearing drinks and foods.
"Yes,"
Vin whispered. "We should move out of the doorway. When the
guards come, we'll want to be mingled in the crowd to make the
soldiers uncertain if they want to attack."
Elend smiled, and
she knew he was remarking to himself about her tendency to keep her
back from being exposed. However, she also knew that he realized she
was right. They walked down the short set of marble steps, joining
the party.
Skaa might have
shied away from such a dangerous couple, but Vin and Elend wore the
costume of noble propriety. The aristocracy of the Final Empire were
quite adept at playing pretend—and when they were uncertain how
to behave, they fell back on the old standard: proper manners.
Lords and ladies
bowed and curtsied, acting as if the emperor and empress's attendance
had been completely expected. Vin let Elend take the lead, as he had
far more experience than she with matters of court. He nodded to
those they passed, displaying just the right amount of
self-assurance. Behind, guards finally arrived at the doors. They
stopped, however, obviously wary about disturbing the party.
"There,"
Vin said, nodding to their left. Through a stained-glass partition,
she could make out a figure sitting at an elevated table.
"I see him,"
Elend said, leading her around the glass, and giving Vin her first
sight of Aradan Yomen, king of the Western Dominance.
He was younger than
she'd expected—perhaps as young as Elend. Round-faced with
serious eyes, Yomen had his head shaved bald, after the manner of
obligators. His dark gray robes were a mark of his station, as were
the complicated patterns of tattoos around his eyes, which proclaimed
him a very high-ranking member of the Canton of Resource.
Yomen stood up as
Vin and Elend approached. He looked utterly dumbfounded. Behind, the
soldiers had begun to carefully work their way into the room. Elend
paused a distance from the high table, with its white cloth and pure
crystal place settings. He met Yomen's gaze, the other guests so
quiet that Vin guessed most were holding their breaths.
Vin checked her
metal reserves, turning slightly, keeping an eye on the guards. Then,
from the corner of her eye, she saw Yomen raise his hand and subtly
wave the guards back.
Chatter began in
the room almost immediately. Yomen sat back down, looking troubled,
and did not return to his meal.
Vin looked up at
Elend. "Well," she whispered, "we're in. What now?"
"I need to
talk to Yomen," Elend said. "But I'd like to wait a little
bit first; give him a chance to get used to our presence."
"Then we
should mingle."
"Split up? We
can cover more nobility that way."
Vin hesitated.
"I can protect
myself, Vin," Elend said, smiling. "I promise."
"All right."
Vin nodded, though that wasn't the only reason she'd paused.
"Talk to as
many people as you can," Elend said. "We're here to shatter
this people's image of safety. After all, we just proved that Yomen
can't keep us out of Fadrex—and we're showing that we're so
unthreatened by him that we'll waltz into a ball that he's attending.
Once we've made a bit of a stir, I'll talk to their king, and they'll
all be certain to listen in."
Vin nodded. "When
you mingle, watch for people who look like they might be willing to
support us against the current government. Slowswift implied that
there are some in the city who aren't pleased with the way their king
is handling things."
Elend nodded,
kissed her cheek, and then she was alone. Vin stood in her beautiful
gown, feeling a moment of shock. Over the last two years, she'd
explicitly worked to keep herself out of situations where she would
wear gowns and mingle with nobility. She'd determinedly worn trousers
and shirts, making it her self-appointed duty to sow discomfort in
those she found too full of themselves.
Yet, she had been
the one to suggest this infiltration to Elend. Why? Why put herself
back in this position? She wasn't displeased with who she was—she
didn't need to prove anything by putting on another silly gown and
making courtly conversation with a bunch of nobility she didn't know.
Did she?
No use
fidgeting about it now, Vin thought, scanning the crowd. Noble
balls in Luthadel—and she could only assume here—were
very polite affairs, designed to encourage mingling, and therefore
facilitate political give and take. Balls had once been the main form
of sport for the nobility, who had lived privileged lives under the
Lord Ruler because their ancestors had been his friends back before
his Ascension.
And so, the party
was made up of small groups—some mixed couples, but many
clusters of just women or just men. A pair was not expected to stay
together the entire time. There were side rooms where gentlemen could
retire and drink with their allies, leaving the women to converse in
the ballroom.
Vin walked forward,
slipping a cup of wine off the tray of a passing servant. By
splitting up, Elend and she had indicated that they were open to
conversation with others. Unfortunately, it had been a long, long
time since Vin had to be alone at a party like this. She felt
awkward, uncertain whether to approach one of the groups, or wait to
see if anyone came to her. She felt somewhat as she had that first
night, when she'd gone to Keep Venture posing as a lone noblewoman,
Sazed her only guide.
That day, she'd
played a part, hiding in her role as Valette Renoux. She couldn't do
that anymore. Everyone knew who she really was. That would have
bothered her, once, but it didn't anymore. Still, she couldn't just
do what she'd done then—stand around and wait for others to
come to her. The entire room seemed to be staring at her.
She strode through
the beautiful white room, aware of how much her black dress stood out
against the women in their colors. She moved around the slices of
colored glass that hung from the ceiling like crystalline curtains.
She'd learned from her earlier balls that there was one thing she
could always count on: Whenever noblewomen gathered, one always set
herself up as the most important.
Vin found her with
ease. The woman had dark hair and tan skin, and she sat at a table
surrounded by sycophants. Vin recognized that arrogant look, that way
the woman's voice was just loud enough to be imperious, but just soft
enough to make everyone hang on her words.
Vin approached with
determination. Years ago, she'd been forced to start at the bottom.
She didn't have time for that. She didn't know the subtle political
intricacies of the city—the allegiances and rivalries. However,
there was one thing of which she was fairly confident.
Whichever side this
woman was on, Vin wanted to be on the opposite one.
Several of the
sycophants looked up as Vin approached, and they grew pale. Their
leader had the poise to remain aloof. She'll try to ignore me,
Vin thought. I can't leave her that option. Vin sat at the
table directly across from the woman. Then, Vin turned and addressed
several of the younger sycophants.
"She's
planning to betray you," Vin said.
The women glanced
at each other.
"She has plans
to get out of the city," Vin said. "When the army attacks,
she won't be here. And she's going to leave you all to die. Make an
ally of me, however, and I will see that you are protected."
"Excuse me?"
the lead woman said, her voice indignant. "Did I invite you to
sit here?"
Vin smiled. That
was easy. A thieving crewleader's basis of power was money—take
that away, and he'd fall. For a woman like this, her power was in the
people who listened to her. To make her react, one simply had to
threaten to take her minions.
Vin turned to
confront the woman. "No, you didn't invite me. I invited myself.
Someone needs to warn the women here."
The woman sniffed.
"You spread lies. You know nothing of my supposed plans."
"Don't I?
You're not the type to let a man like Yomen determine your future,
and if the others here think about it, they'll realized that there's
no way you would let yourself get caught in Fadrex City without plans
to escape. I'm surprised you're even still here."
"Your threats
do not frighten me," the lady said.
"I haven't
threatened you yet," Vin noted, sipping her wine. She gave a
careful Push on the emotions of the women at the table, making them
more worried. "We could get to that, if you wish—though,
technically, I've got your entire city under threat already."
The woman narrowed
her eyes at Vin. "Don't listen to her, ladies."
"Yes, Lady
Patresen," one of the women said, speaking a little too quickly.
Patresen, Vin
thought, relieved that someone had finally mentioned the woman's
name. Do I know that name? "House Patresen," Vin
said idly. "Isn't that a cousin family of House Elariel?"
Lady Patresen
remained quiet.
"I killed an
Elariel once," Vin said. "It was a good fight. Shan was a
very clever woman, and a skilled Mistborn." She leaned in. "You
may think that the stories about me are exaggerations. You may assume
that I didn't really kill the Lord Ruler, and that the talk is simply
propaganda crafted to help stabilize my husband's rule.
"Think as you
wish, Lady Patresen. However, there is one thing you must
understand. You are not my adversary. I don't have time for
people like you. You're a petty woman in an insignificant city, part
of a doomed culture of nobility. I'm not talking to you because I
want to be part of your schemes; you can't even understand how
unimportant they are to me. I'm just here to voice a warning. We're
going to take this city—and when we do, there will be little
room for people who were against us."
Patresen paled just
slightly. However, her voice was calm when she spoke. "I doubt
that's true. If you could take the city as easily as you claim, then
you would have already."
"My husband is
a man of honor," Vin said, "and decided that he wished to
speak with Yomen before attacking. I, however, am not quite so
temperate."
"Well, I
think that—"
"You don't
understand, do you?" Vin asked. "It doesn't matter what you
think. Look, I know you're the type with powerful connections. Those
connections will have told you by now the numbers we bring. Forty
thousand men, twenty thousand koloss, and a full contingent of
Allomancers. Plus two Mistborn. My husband and I did not come to this
conference to make allies, or even to make enemies. We came to give
warning. I suggest you take it."
She punctuated her
last comment with a powerful Soothing. She wanted it to be obvious to
the women, to let them know that they were—indeed—under
her power. Then, she stood, trailing away from the table.
What she had said
to Patresen wasn't really that important—the important thing
was that Vin had been seen confronting the woman. Hopefully, that
would put Vin on a side in the local politics, making her less
threatening to some factions in the room. That, in turn, would make
her more accessible, and—
The sound of chairs
scooting back from the table came from behind her. Vin turned,
suspicious, and saw most of Lady Patresen's clique approaching in a
hurry, leaving their leader sitting virtually alone at her table, a
scowl on her face.
Vin tensed.
"Lady
Venture," one of the women said. "Perhaps you would let
some of us . . . introduce you at the party?"
Vin frowned.
"Please,"
the woman said very quietly.
Vin blinked in
surprise. She'd expected the women to resent her, not listen
to her. She glanced about. Most of the women looked so intimidated
that Vin thought they might wilt away, like leaves in the sun.
Feeling a little bemused, Vin nodded her head and let herself be led
into the party for introductions.

Rashek wore
both black and white. I think he wanted to show that he was a
duality, Preservation and Ruin.
This, of
course, was a lie. After all, he had only touched one of the
powers—and only in a very small way at that.





31
"LORD
BREEZE GUESSED CORRECTLY," Sazed said, standing at the
front of their small group. "As far as I can tell, the diversion
of waters into this underground reservoir was intentional. The
project must have taken decades. It required widening natural
passageways so that the water—which once fed the river and
canals above—instead flowed into this cavern."
"Yes, but
what's the point?" Breeze asked. "Why waste so much effort
to move a river?"
Three days in
Urteau had allowed them to do as Spook had suggested, moving their
troops into the Ministry building, ostensibly taking up residence
inside of it. The Citizen couldn't know about the cache, otherwise he
would have ransacked it. That meant Sazed and his team held a
distinct advantage should events in the city turn ugly.
They had pulled
some of the furniture from the building above and arranged it—with
sheets and tapestries to create "rooms"—amid the
shelves in the cavern. Logic dictated that the cavern was the best
place to spend their time, for should someone attack the Ministry
building, the cavern was where they wanted to be. True, they'd be
trapped—but with the supplies they had, they'd be able to
survive indefinitely and work out a plan of escape.
Sazed, Breeze,
Spook, and Allrianne sat in one of these partitioned-off areas among
the shelves of food. "The reason that the Lord Ruler made this
lake is simple, I think." Sazed turned, glancing over his
shoulder at the lake. "That water comes via an underground
river, filtered—in all likelihood—through layers of rock.
It is pure water, the likes of which you rarely see in the Final
Empire. No ash, no sediment. The purpose of that water is to sustain
a population should a disaster occur. If it were still flowing into
the canals above, it would quickly get soiled and polluted by the
population living in the city."
"The Lord
Ruler was looking to the future," Spook said, still wearing his
strange eye bandage. He'd turned aside all questions and promptings
regarding why he wore it, though Sazed was beginning to suspect it
had to do with burning tin.
Sazed nodded at the
young man's comment. "The Lord Ruler wasn't worried about
causing financial ruin in Urteau—he just wanted to make certain
this cavern had access to a constant, flowing source of fresh water."
"Isn't this
all beside the point?" Allrianne asked. "So we have water.
What about that maniac running the city?"
Sazed paused, and
the others turned to look to him. I am, unfortunately, in charge.
"Well," he said, "we should speak of this. Emperor
Venture has asked us to secure the city. As the Citizen has proven
unwilling to meet with us again, we shall need to discuss other
options."
"That man
needs to go," Spook said. "We need assassins."
"I fear that
wouldn't work very well, my dear boy," Breeze said.
"Why not?"
Spook asked. "We killed the Lord Ruler, and that worked pretty
well."
"Ah,"
Breeze said, raising a finger, "but the Lord Ruler was
irreplaceable. He was a god, and so killing him created a
psychological impact on his populace."
Allrianne nodded.
"This Citizen's not a force of nature, but a man—and men
can be replaced. If we assassinate Quellion, one of his lackeys will
simply take his place."
"And we will
be branded as murderers," Breeze added.
"What, then?"
Spook asked. "We leave him alone?"
"Of course
not," Breeze said. "If we want to take this city, we need
to undermine him, then remove him. We prove that his entire
system is faulty—that his government is, in essence, silly. If
we manage that, we won't just stop him, we'll stop everyone who has
worked with him and supported him. That is the only way we're going
to take Urteau short of marching an army in here and seizing it by
force."
"And, since
His Majesty kindly left us without any troops to speak of .
. ." Allrianne said.
"I am not
convinced that such rash action is required," Sazed said.
"Perhaps, given more time, we'll be able to work with this man."
"Work with
him?" Spook asked. "You've been here three
days—isn't that enough for you to see what Quellion is like?"
"I have seen,"
Sazed said. "And, to be perfectly honest, I do not know that I
can fault the Citizen's views."
The cavern fell
silent.
"Perhaps you
should explain yourself, my dear man," Breeze said, sipping at a
cup of wine.
"The things
that the Citizen says are not false," Sazed said. "We
cannot blame him for teaching the very same things that Kelsier did.
The Survivor spoke of killing the nobility—goodness knows, we
all saw him engaging in that activity often enough. He spoke
of revolution and of skaa ruling themselves."
"He spoke of
extreme actions during extreme times," Breeze said. "That's
what you do when you need to motivate people. Even Kelsier wouldn't
have taken it this far."
"Perhaps,"
Sazed said. "But can we really be surprised that people who
heard Kelsier speak have created this society? And, what right have
we to take it from them? In a way, they've been truer to Kelsier than
we have. Can you really say that you think he'd be pleased to find
out that we put a nobleman on the throne not one day after he died?"
Breeze and Spook
glanced at each other, and neither contradicted him.
"It's just not
right," Spook finally said. "These people claim to know
Kelsier, but they don't. He didn't want people to be grim and
bullied—he wanted them to be free and happy."
"Indeed,"
Breeze said. "Besides, we did choose to follow Elend
Venture—and he's given us an order. Our empire needs these
supplies, and we can't afford to let an organized rebellion seize and
control one of the most important cities in the empire. We need to
secure this cache and protect the people of Urteau. It's for the
greater good, and all that!"
Allrianne nodded
her agreement—and, as always, Sazed felt her touch on his
emotions.
For the greater
good . . . Sazed thought. He knew that Spook was right. Kelsier
wouldn't want this warped society being perpetuated in his name.
Something needed to be done. "Very well," he said. "What
should our course of action be?"
"Nothing, for
now," Breeze said. "We need time to feel out the city's
climate. How close are the people to rebelling against dear Quellion?
How active is the local criminal element? How corruptible are the men
who serve the new government? Give me some time to discover answers
to these questions, and then we can decide what to do."
"I still say
we do it as Kelsier did," Spook said. "Why can't we just
topple the Citizen like he did the Lord Ruler?"
"I doubt that
would work," Breeze said, sipping his wine.
"Why not?"
Spook asked.
"For a very
simple reason, my dear boy," Breeze said. "We don't have
Kelsier anymore."
Sazed nodded. That
much was true—though he did wonder if they would ever be rid of
the Survivor's legacy. In a way, the battle in this town had been
inevitable. If Kelsier had possessed one flaw, it had been his
extreme hatred of the nobility. It was a passion that had driven him,
had helped him accomplish the impossible. However, Sazed feared it
would destroy those whom it had infected.
"Take the time
you need, Breeze," Sazed said. "Let me know when you think
we are ready to take the next step."
Breeze nodded, and
the meeting broke up. Sazed stood, sighing quietly. As he did, he met
Breeze's eyes, and the man winked at him with a smile that seemed to
say, "This won't be half as difficult as you think." Sazed
smiled back, and he felt Breeze's touch on his emotions, trying to
encourage him.
Yet, the Soother's
hand was too light. Breeze couldn't have known the conflict that
still twisted inside of Sazed. A conflict about much more than
Kelsier and the problems in Urteau. He was glad for a little bit of
time to wait in the city, for he still had much work to do with the
religions listed, one per sheet, in his portfolio.
Even that work was
difficult for him to get to recently. He did his best to give the
others leadership, as Elend had asked. However, the pernicious
darkness Sazed felt inside of him refused to be shaken away. It was
more dangerous to him, he knew, than anything else he had faced while
serving with the crew, because it made him feel as if he didn't care.
I must
keep working, he decided, walking away from the meeting
place, carefully sliding his portfolio off of a nearby shelf. I
have to keep searching. I must not give up.
It was far more
difficult than that, however. In the past, logic and thought had
always been his refuge. However, his emotions didn't respond to
logic. No amount of thinking about what he should be doing
could help him.
He ground his
teeth, walking, hoping that the motion would help him work out the
knots within himself. A part of him wanted to go out and study the
new form of the Church of the Survivor that had sprung up here in
Urteau. However, that seemed like a waste of time. The world was
ending, why study one more religion? He already knew this one was
false; he'd dismissed the Church of the Survivor early in his
studies. It was filled with more contradictions than almost any in
his portfolio.
More filled with
passion as well.
All the religions
in his collection were alike in one respect; they had failed. The
people who'd followed them had died, been conquered, their religions
stamped out. Was that not proof enough for him? He'd tried preaching
them, but he'd very, very rarely had any success.
It was all
meaningless. Everything was ending anyway.
No! Sazed
thought. I will find the answers. The religions didn't disappear
completely—the Keepers preserved them. There must be answers in
one of them. Somewhere.
Eventually, he
found his way to the wall of the cavern, which held the steel plate
inscribed by the Lord Ruler. They already had a record of what it
said, of course, but Sazed wanted to see it and read it for himself.
He looked up at the metal, which reflected the light of a nearby
lantern, reading the words of the very man who had destroyed so many
religions.
The plan, the
words said, is simple. When the power returns to the Well, I will
take it and make certain the thing remains trapped.
And still I
worry. It has proven far more clever than I had assumed, infecting my
thoughts, making me see and feel things I do not wish to. It is so
subtle, so careful. I cannot see how it could cause my death, but
still I worry.
If I am dead,
then these caches will provide some measure of protection for my
people. I fear what is coming. What might be. If you read this now,
and I am gone, then I fear for you. Still, I will try to leave what
help I can.
There are
metals of Allomancy which I have shared with none. If you are a
priest of mine, working this cavern and reading these words, know
that you will incur my wrath if you share this knowledge. However, if
it is true that the force has returned and I am unable to deal with
it, then perhaps knowledge of electrum will give you some aid. My
researchers have discovered that mixing an alloy of forty-five
percent gold and fifty-five percent silver creates a new Allomantic
metal. Burning it will not give you the power of atium, but will
provide some help against those who themselves burn it.
And that was it.
Beside the words was a map, indicating the location of the next
cache—the one in the small southern mining village that Vin and
Elend had secured a short time back. Sazed read over the words again,
but they only served to enhance his sense of despair. Even the Lord
Ruler seemed to feel helpless in the face of their current
predicament. He'd planned to be alive, he'd planned for none of this
to happen. But he'd known that his plans might not work.
Sazed turned,
leaving the plate behind, walking to the bank of the underground
lake. The water lay like black glass, undisturbed by wind or ash,
though it did ripple slightly from the current. A pair of lanterns
sat by the edge of the water, burning quietly, marking the bank.
Behind him, a short distance away, some of the soldiers had made
camp—though a good two-thirds of them kept to the upstairs to
make certain the building had the look of being lived in. Others
searched the cavern walls in hopes of finding a secret exit. They
would all be a lot more comfortable within the cavern if they knew
they had a means of escaping it, should they get attacked.
"Sazed."
Sazed turned, then
nodded to Spook as the young man walked up to join him on the bank of
the black still water. They stood together quietly, contemplative.
This one has
troubles of his own, Sazed thought, noting the way that Spook
watched the waters. Then, surprisingly, Spook reached up and untied
the cloth from his eyes. He pulled it free, revealing a pair of
spectacles underneath, perhaps used to keep the cloth from pressing
his eyes closed. Spook removed the spectacles and blinked, squinting.
His eyes began to water, then he reached down and put out one of the
two lanterns, leaving Sazed standing in very dim light. Spook sighed,
standing and wiping his eyes.
So it is
his tin, Sazed thought. As Sazed considered the thought, he
realized that he had often seen the young man wearing gloves—as
if to protect his skin. Sazed suspected that if he watched closely,
he'd see the boy put in earplugs as well. Curious.
"Sazed,"
Spook said, "I wanted to talk to you about something."
"Please, speak
as you wish."
"I . . ."
Spook trailed off, then glanced at Sazed. "I think Kelsier is
still with us."
Sazed frowned.
"Not alive, of
course," Spook said quickly. "But, I think he's watching
over us. Protecting us . . . that sort of thing."
"That's a
pleasant sentiment, I think," Sazed said. Completely false,
of course.
"It's not just
a sentiment," Spook replied. "He's here. I was just
wondering if there was anything in any of those religions you studied
that talked about things like that."
"Of course,"
Sazed said. "Many of them spoke of the dead remaining as spirits
to help, or curse, the living."
They fell silent,
Spook obviously waiting for something.
"Well?"
Spook asked. "Aren't you going to preach a religion to me?"
"I don't do
that anymore," Sazed said quietly.
"Oh,"
Spook said. "Um, why not?"
Sazed shook his
head. "I find it hard to preach to others that which has offered
me no solace, Spook. I am looking through them, trying to discover
which—if any of them—are right and true. Once I have that
knowledge, I will be happy to share with you any that seem most
likely to contain truth. For now, however, I believe none of them,
and therefore will preach none of them."
Surprisingly, Spook
didn't argue with him. Sazed had found it frustrating that his
friends—people who were, for the most part, determined
atheists—would grow so offended when he threatened to join them
in their lack of belief. And yet, Spook didn't offer arguments.
"It makes
sense," the young man finally said. "Those religions aren't
true. After all, Kelsier is the one who watches over us, not those
other gods."
Sazed closed his
eyes. "How can you say that, Spook? You lived with him—you
knew him. We both know that Kelsier was no god."
"The people of
this city think he is."
"And where has
it gotten them?" Sazed asked. "Their belief has brought
oppression and violence. What is the good of faith if this
is the result? A city full of people misinterpreting their god's
commands? A world of ash and pain and death and sorrow?" Sazed
shook his head. "That is why I no longer wear my metalminds.
Religions which cannot offer more than this do not deserve to be
taught."
"Oh,"
Spook said. He knelt down, dipping a hand in the water, then
shivered. "That makes sense too, I guess—though I'd have
guessed it was because of her."
"What do you
mean?"
"Your woman,"
Spook said. "The other Keeper—Tindwyl. I heard her talk
about religion. She didn't think very much of it. I'd have thought
that maybe you wouldn't talk about religion anymore because that
might be what she'd have wanted."
Sazed felt a chill.
"Anyway,"
Spook said, standing, wiping off his hand, "the people of this
city know more than you think they do. Kelsier is watching over us."
With that, the boy
trailed away. Sazed, however, wasn't listening. He stood, staring at
the ebony waters.
Because that
might be what she'd have wanted. . . .
Tindwyl had thought
religion to be foolish. She had said that people who looked toward
ancient prophecies or unseen forces were seeking excuses. During her
last few weeks with Sazed, this had often been a topic of
conversation—even slight contention—between the two of
them, for their research had dealt with the prophecies regarding the
Hero of Ages.
That research had
turned out to be useless. At best, the prophecies were the vain hopes
of men who wished for a better world. At worst, they had been
cleverly placed to further the goals of a malignant force. Either
way, he had believed strongly in his work at that time. And Tindwyl
had helped him. They had searched through their metalminds, sifting
through centuries of information, history, and mythology, seeking
references to the Deepness, the Hero of Ages, and the Well of
Ascension. She had worked with him, claiming that her interest was
academic, not religious. Sazed suspected that she'd had a different
motivation.
She'd wanted to be
with him. She had suppressed her dislike of religion out of a desire
to be involved with what he found important. And, now that she was
dead, Sazed found himself doing what she'd found important.
Tindwyl had studied politics and leadership. She'd loved to read the
biographies of great statesmen and generals. Had he unconsciously
agreed to become Elend's ambassador so that he could involve himself
in Tindwyl's studies, just as she—before her death—had
given herself over to his?
He wasn't certain.
In truth, he thought his problems were deeper than that. However, the
fact that Spook had been the one to make such an astute
observation gave Sazed pause. It was a very clever way of looking at
things. Instead of contradicting him, Spook had offered a possible
explanation.
Sazed was
impressed. He turned out, looking across the waters for a time and
contemplating what Spook had said. Then, he pulled out the next
religion in his portfolio and began to consider it. The sooner he got
through them, the sooner he could—hopefully—find the
truth.

Allomancy,
obviously, is of Preservation. The rational mind will see this. For,
in the case of Allomancy, net power is gained. It is provided by an
external source—Preservation's own body.





32
"ELEND,
IS THAT REALLY YOU?"
Elend turned with
shock. He'd been mingling at the ball, talking with a group of men
who had turned out to be distant cousins of his. The voice from
behind, however, seemed far more familiar. "Telden?" Elend
asked. "What are you doing here!"
"I live here,
El," Telden said, clasping hands with Elend.
Elend was
dumbfounded. He hadn't seen Telden since his house had escaped
Luthadel in the days of chaos following the death of the Lord Ruler.
Once, this man had been one of Elend's best friends. To the side,
Elend's cousins made a graceful withdrawal. "I thought you were
in BasMardin, Tell," Elend said.
"No,"
Telden said. "That's where my house settled, but I thought that
the area was too dangerous, what with the koloss rampages. I moved
inward to Fadrex once Lord Yomen came to power—he quickly
gained a reputation for being able to provide stability."
Elend smiled. The
years had changed his friend. Telden had once been the model of a
debonair ladies' man, his hair and expensive suits intended to draw
attention. It wasn't that the older Telden had grown sloppy, but he
obviously didn't take as much care to appear stylish. He'd always
been a large man—tall and kind of rectangular—and the
extra weight he'd gained made him look far more . . . ordinary than
he once had.
"Elend,"
Telden said, shaking his head. "You know, for the longest time,
I refused to believe that you'd really managed to seize power in
Luthadel."
"You were
there at my coronation!"
"I thought
that they had picked you as a puppet, El," Telden said, rubbing
his wide chin. "I thought . . . well, I'm sorry. I guess I just
didn't have much faith in you."
Elend laughed. "You
were right, my friend. I turned out to be a terrible king."
Telden obviously
wasn't sure how to reply to that.
"I did get
better at the job," Elend said. "I just had to stumble
through a few messes first."
Partygoers shuffled
through the divided ballroom. Though those watching did their best to
appear uninterested and aloof, Elend could tell that they were doing
the noble equivalent of gawking. He glanced to the side, where Vin
stood in her gorgeous black dress, surrounded by a group of women.
She seemed to be doing well—she took to the courtly scene far
better than she liked to let herself think or admit. She was
graceful, poised, and the center of attention.
She was also
alert—Elend could tell by the way she managed to keep her back
to a wall or glass partition. She'd be burning iron or steel,
watching for sudden movements of metal that might indicate an
attacking Coinshot. Elend began burning iron as well, and he made
certain to keep burning zinc to Soothe the emotions of those in the
room, keeping them from feeling too angry or threatened by his
intrusion. Other Allomancers—Breeze, or even Vin—would
have had trouble Soothing an entire room at once. For Elend, with his
inordinate power, it barely took any attention.
Telden still stood
nearby, looking troubled. Elend tried to say something to start their
conversation again, but he struggled to come up with anything that
wouldn't sound awkward. It had been nearly four years since Telden
had left Luthadel. Before that, he had been one of the friends with
whom Elend had discussed political theory, planning with the idealism
of youth for the day when they would lead their houses. Yet, the days
of youth—and their idealistic theories—were gone.
"So . . ."
Telden said. "This is where we end up, is it?"
Elend nodded.
"You're not .
. . really going to attack the city, are you?" Telden asked.
"You're just here to intimidate Yomen, right?"
"No,"
Elend said softly. "I will conquer the city if I have to,
Telden."
Telden flushed.
"What happened to you, Elend? Where is the man who talked about
rights and legality?"
"The world
caught up with me, Telden," Elend said. "I can't be the man
I was."
"So you become
the Lord Ruler instead?"
Elend hesitated. It
felt odd to have another confront him with his own questions and
arguments. Part of him felt a stab of fear—if Telden asked
these things, then Elend had been right to worry about them. Perhaps
they were true.
Yet, a stronger
impulse flared within him. An impulse nurtured by Tindwyl, then
refined by a year of struggling to bring order to the shattered
remains of the Final Empire.
An impulse to trust
himself.
"No, Telden,"
Elend said firmly. "I'm not the Lord Ruler. A parliamentary
council rules in Luthadel, and there are others like it in every city
I've brought into my empire. This is the first time that I've marched
on a city with my armies out of a need to conquer, rather than
protect—and that is only because Yomen himself took this city
from an ally of mine."
Telden snorted.
"You set yourself up as emperor."
"Because
that's what the people need, Telden," Elend said. "They
don't want to return to the days of the Lord Ruler—but they
would rather do that than live in chaos. Yomen's success here proves
that much. The people want to know that someone is watching over
them. They had a god-emperor for a thousand years—now is not
the time to leave them without a leader."
"You mean to
tell me that you're just a figurehead?" Telden asked, folding
his arms.
"Hardly,"
Elend said. "But, eventually, I hope to be. We both know I'm a
scholar and not a king."
Telden frowned. He
didn't believe Elend. And yet, Elend found that fact didn't bother
him. Something about saying those words, about confronting the
skepticism, made him recognize the validity of his own confidence.
Telden didn't understand—he hadn't lived through what Elend
had. The young Elend himself wouldn't have agreed with what he was
now doing. A part of that youth still had a voice inside of Elend's
soul—and he would never quiet it. However, it was time to stop
letting it undermine him.
Elend put a hand on
his friend's shoulder. "It's all right, Tell. It took me years
to convince you that the Lord Ruler was a terrible emperor. I fully
expect it to take the same amount of time to convince you that I'll
be a good one."
Telden smiled
wanly.
"Going to tell
me that I've changed?" Elend asked. "Seems all the rage
lately."
Telden laughed. "I
thought that was obvious. No need to point it out."
"What, then?"
Elend asked.
"Well . . ."
Telden said. "I was actually going to chide you for not inviting
me to your wedding! I'm hurt, El. Truly. I spent the better part of
my youth giving you relationship advice, then when you finally pick a
girl, you don't even let me know about the marriage!"
Elend laughed,
turning to follow Telden's gaze toward Vin. Confident and powerful,
yet somehow delicate and graceful. Elend smiled with pride. Even
during the glory days of the Luthadel ball scene, he couldn't
remember a woman commanding as much attention as Vin now did. And,
unlike Elend, she'd stepped into this ball without knowing a single
person.
"I feel a
little like a proud parent," Telden said, laying a hand on
Elend's shoulder. "There were days I was convinced that you were
hopeless, El! I figured you'd someday wander into a library and just
disappear completely. We'd find you twenty years later covered with
dust, picking through some philosophy text for the seven hundredth
time. Yet, here you are, married—and to a woman like that!"
"Sometimes, I
don't understand either," Elend said. "I can't ever come up
with any logical reason why she would want to be with me. I just . .
. have to trust her judgment."
"Either way,
you did well."
Elend raised an
eyebrow. "I seem to remember that you once tried to
talk me out of spending time with her."
Telden flushed.
"You have to admit, she was acting very suspiciously
when she came to those parties."
"Yes,"
Elend said. "She seemed too much like a real person to be a
noblewoman." He looked over at Telden, smiling. "However,
if you'll excuse me, I have something I need to do."
"Of course,
El," Telden said, bowing slightly as Elend withdrew. The move
felt a little odd coming from Telden. They didn't really know each
other anymore. However, they did have memories of friendship.
I didn't tell
him that I killed Jastes, Elend thought as he made his way
through the room, its members parting easily for him. I wonder if
he knows.
Elend's enhanced
hearing picked out a general rise in excitement among the whispered
conversations as people realized what he was doing. He'd given Yomen
time enough to deal with his surprise; it was time to confront the
man. Though part of Elend's purpose in visiting the ball was to
intimidate the local nobility, the main reason was still to speak
with their king.
Yomen watched Elend
approach the high table—and, to his credit, the obligator did
not look frightened at the prospect of a meeting. His meal still
remained uneaten, however. Elend didn't wait for permission to come
to the table, but he did pause and wait as Yomen waved for servants
to clear space and set Elend a place directly across the high table
from him.
Elend sat, trusting
in Vin—mixed with his own burning steel and tin—to warn
him of attacks from behind. He was the only one on this side of the
table, and Yomen's dining companions all retired as Elend seated
himself, leaving the two rulers alone. In another situation, the
image might have looked ridiculous: two men seated across from each
other with empty table wings extending a great distance to either
side. The white tablecloth and crystalline dinnerware were pristine,
just as it would have been during the Lord Ruler's day.
Elend had sold all
such finery he owned, struggling to feed his people during the last
few winters.
Yomen laced his
fingers on the table in front of him—his meal taken away by
silent servants—and studied Elend, his cautious eyes framed by
intricate tattoos. Yomen wore no crown, but he did wear a
single bead of metal tied so that it hung in the center of his
forehead.
Atium.
"There is a
saying in the Steel Ministry," Yomen finally said. " 'Sit
down to dine with evil, and you will ingest it with your meal.' "
"It's a good
thing we're not eating, then," Elend said, smiling slightly.
Yomen did not smile
back.
"Yomen,"
Elend said, growing more serious. "I come to you now, not as an
emperor seeking for new lands to control, but as a desperate king
seeking allies. The world has become a dangerous place—the land
itself seems to be fighting us, or at least falling apart beneath us.
Accept my hand of friendship, and let us be done with wars."
Yomen didn't reply.
He just sat, fingers laced, studying Elend.
"You doubt my
sincerity," Elend said. "I can't say that I blame you,
since I marched my army up to your doorstep. Is there a way that I
can persuade you? Would you be willing to enter into talks or
parley?"
Again, no answer.
So, this time, Elend just waited. The room around them felt still.
Yomen finally
spoke. "You are a flagrant and garish man, Elend Venture."
Elend bristled at
that. Perhaps it was the ball setting, perhaps it was the way Yomen
so flippantly ignored his offer. However, Elend found himself
responding to the comment in a way he might have years before, when
he hadn't been a king at war. "It's a bad habit I've always
had," Elend said. "I'm afraid that the years of rule—and
of being trained in propriety—haven't changed one fact: I'm a
terribly rude man. Bad breeding would be my guess."
"You find this
a game," the obligator said, eyes hard. "You come to my
city to slaughter my people, then you dance into my ball hoping to
frighten the nobility to the point of hysteria."
"No,"
Elend said. "No, Yomen, this is no game. The world seems near to
ending, and I'm just doing my best to help as many people survive as
possible."
"And doing
your best includes conquering my city?"
Elend shook his
head. "I'm not good at lying, Yomen. So, I'll be truthful with
you. I don't want to kill anyone—as I said, I'd rather we
simply made a truce and were done with it. Give me the information I
seek, pool your resources with mine, and I will not force you to give
up your city. Deny me, and things will grow more difficult."
Yomen sat quietly
for a moment, music still being played softly in the background,
vibrating over the hum of a hundred polite conversations.
"Do you know
why I dislike men like you, Venture?" Yomen finally asked.
"My
insufferable charm and wit?" Elend asked. "I doubt it's my
good looks—but, compared to that of an obligator, I suppose
even my face could be enviable."
Yomen's expression
darkened. "How did a man like you ever end up at a table of
negotiation?"
"I was trained
by a surly Mistborn, a sarcastic Terrisman, and a group of
disrespectful thieves," Elend said, sighing. "Plus, on top
of that, I was a fairly insufferable person to begin with. But,
kindly continue with your insult—I didn't mean to interrupt."
"I don't like
you," Yomen continued, "because you have the gall to
believe that you deserve to take this city."
"I do,"
Elend said. "It belonged to Cett; half the soldiers I brought
with me on this march once served him, and this is their homeland.
We've come to liberate, not conquer."
"Do these
people look to you like they need liberation?" Yomen said,
nodding to the dancing couples.
"Yes,
actually," Elend said. "Yomen, you're the upstart here—not
me. You have no right to this city, and you know it."
"I have the
right given me by the Lord Ruler."
"We don't
accept the Lord Ruler's right to rule," Elend said. "That's
why we killed him. Instead, we look to the people's right to
rule."
"Is that so?"
Yomen said, hands still laced before him. "Because, as I recall,
the people of your city chose Ferson Penrod to be their
king."
Good point,
that one, Elend had to admit.
Yomen leaned
forward. "This is the reason I don't like you, Venture. You're a
hypocrite of the worst kind. You pretended to let the people be in
charge—but when they ousted you and picked another, you had
your Mistborn conquer the city back for you. You rule by force, not
by common consent, so don't talk to me about rights."
"There were .
. . circumstances in Luthadel, Yomen. Penrod was working with our
enemies, and he bought himself the throne through manipulating the
assembly."
"That sounds
like a flaw in the system," Yomen said. "A system that you
set up—a system replacing the one of order that existed before
it. A people depend on stability in their government; they need
someone to look to. A leader that they can trust, a leader with true
authority. Only a man chosen by the Lord Ruler has that claim on
authority."
Elend studied the
obligator. The frustrating thing was, he almost agreed with the man.
Yomen said things that Elend himself had said, even if they were
twisted a bit by his perspective as an obligator.
"Only a man
chosen by the Lord Ruler has that claim on authority . . ."
Elend said, frowning. The phrase sounded familiar. "That's from
Durton, isn't it? Calling of Trust?"
Yomen paused.
"Yes."
"I prefer
Gallingskaw, when it comes to divine right."
Yomen made a curt
gesture. "Gallingskaw was a heretic."
"That makes
his theories invalid?" Elend asked.
"No,"
Yomen said. "It shows that he lacked the ability to reason
soundly—otherwise he wouldn't have gotten himself executed.
That affects the validity of his theories. Besides, there is
no divine mandate in the common man, as he proposed."
"The Lord
Ruler was a common man before he took his throne," Elend said.
"Yes,"
Yomen said, "but the Lord Ruler touched divinity at the Well of
Ascension. That imprinted the Sliver of Infinity upon him, and gave
him the Right of Inference."
"Vin, my wife,
touched that same divinity."
"I don't
accept that story," Yomen said. "As it has been said, the
Sliver of Infinity was unique, unplanned, uncreated."
"Don't bring
Urdree into this," Elend said, raising a finger. "We both
know he was more a poet than a real philosopher—he ignored
convention, and never gave proper attributions. At least give me the
benefit of the doubt and quote Hardren. He'd give you a much better
foundation."
Yomen opened his
mouth, then stopped, frowning. "This is pointless," he
said. "Arguing philosophy will not remove the fact that you have
an army camped outside my city, nor change the fact that I find you a
hypocrite, Elend Venture."
Elend sighed. For a
moment, he'd thought that they might be able to respect one another
as scholars. There was one problem, however. Elend saw true loathing
in Yomen's eyes. And, Elend suspected that there was a deeper reason
for it than Elend's alleged hypocrisy. After all, Elend had
married the woman who had killed Yomen's god.
"Yomen,"
Elend said, leaning in. "I realize we have differences. However,
one thing seems clear—we both care about the people of this
empire. We both took the time to study political theory, and we both
apparently focused on the texts that held the good of the people up
as the prime reason for rule. We should be able to make this work.
"I want to
offer you a deal. Accept kingship under me—you'd be able to
stay in control, with very few changes in your government. I will
need access to the city and its resources, and we will need to
discuss setting up a parliamentary council. Other than that, you may
continue as you wish—you can even keep throwing your parties
and teaching about the Lord Ruler. I will trust your judgment."
Yomen did not scoff
at the offer, but Elend could tell that he also didn't give it much
weight. He had likely already known what Elend would say.
"You mistake
one thing, Elend Venture," Yomen said.
"And that is?"
"That I can be
intimidated, bribed, or influenced."
"You're no
fool, Yomen," Elend said. "Sometimes, fighting isn't worth
its cost. We both know that you can't beat me."
"That is
debatable," Yomen said. "Regardless, I do not respond well
to threats. Perhaps if you didn't have an army camped on my doorstep,
I could see my way to an alliance."
"We both know
that without an army on your doorstep, you wouldn't even have
listened to me," Elend said. "You refused every messenger I
sent, even before I marched here."
Yomen just shook
his head. "You seem more reasonable than I would have thought,
Elend Venture, but that doesn't change facts. You already have a
large empire of your own. In coming here, you betray your arrogance.
Why did you need my dominance? Wasn't what you already had enough?"
"Firstly,"
Elend said, raising a finger, "I feel that I need to remind you
again that you stole this kingdom from an ally of mine. I had to come
here eventually, if only to make good on promises I gave Cett.
However, there's something much larger at play here." Elend
hesitated, then made a gamble. "I need to know what is in your
storage cavern."
Elend was rewarded
with a slight look of surprise on Yomen's face, and that was all the
confirmation Elend needed. Yomen did know about the cavern. Vin was
right. And considering that atium displayed so prominently on his
forehead, perhaps she was right about what was contained in the
cavern.
"Look, Yomen,"
Elend said, speaking quickly. "I don't care about the atium—it's
barely of any value anymore. I need to know what instructions the
Lord Ruler left in that cavern. What information is there for us?
What supplies did he find necessary for our survival?"
"I don't know
what you are talking about," Yomen said flatly. He wasn't a
particularly good liar.
"You asked me
why I came here," Elend said. "Yomen, it's not about
conquering or taking this land from you. I realize you may find that
hard to believe, but it's the truth. The Final Empire is dying.
Surely you've seen that. Mankind needs to band together, pool its
resources—and you have vital clues we need. Don't force me to
break down your gates to get them. Work with me."
Yomen shook his
head. "There is your mistake again, Venture. You see, I don't
care if you attack me." He met Elend's eyes. "It would be
better for my people to fight and to die than to be ruled by
the man who overthrew our god and destroyed our religion."
Elend held those
eyes, and saw determination in them.
"That's how it
has to be?" Elend said.
"It is,"
Yomen said. "I can expect an attack in the morning, then?"
"Of course
not," Elend said, standing. "Your soldiers aren't starved
yet. I'll get back to you in a few months." Maybe then
you'll be more willing to deal.
Elend turned to go,
then hesitated. "Nice party, by the way," he said, glancing
back at Yomen. "Regardless of what I believe, I do think that
your god would be pleased with what you've done here. I think you
should reconsider your prejudices. The Lord Ruler probably isn't fond
of Vin and me, but I'd say that he'd rather that your people live
than get themselves killed."
Elend nodded in
respect, then left the high table, feeling more frustrated than he
showed. It felt like Yomen and he had been so close, and yet at the
same time, an alliance seemed impossible. Not while the obligator had
such hatred of Elend and Vin.
He forced himself
to relax, walking. There was little he could do about the situation
at the moment—it would take the siege to make Yomen rethink his
position. I'm at a ball, Elend thought, wandering. I
should enjoy what I can of it, letting myself be seen by the nobility
here, intimidating them and making them think about helping us
instead of Yomen. . . .
A thought occurred
to him. He glanced at Vin, then waved a servant over to him.
"My lord?"
the man asked.
"I need you to
fetch something for me," Elend said.
Vin was the center
of attention. Women pandered to her, hung on her words, and looked to
her as a model. They wanted to know news from Luthadel, to hear about
fashion, politics, and events from the great city. They didn't reject
her, or even seem to resent her.
The instant
acceptance was the strangest thing Vin had ever experienced. She
stood amid the women in their gowns and finery, and was foremost
among them. She knew that it was just because of her power—yet,
the women of this city seemed almost desperate to have someone to
look to. An empress.
And Vin found
herself enjoying it. There was a part of her that had craved this
acceptance since the first day she'd attended a ball. She'd spent
that year being mistreated by most of the women of court—some
had let her join with their company, but she'd always been an
insignificant country noblewoman with no connections or significance.
It was a shallow thing, this acceptance, but sometimes even shallow
things feel important. Plus, there was something else about it. As
she smiled toward a newcomer—a young niece that one of the
women wanted to meet Vin—Vin realized what it was.
This is part of
me, she thought. I didn't want it to be—perhaps
because I didn't believe that I deserved it. I found this life too
different, too full of beauty and confidence. Yet, I am a
noblewoman. I do fit in here.
I was born to
the streets by one parent, but I was born to this by another.
She'd spent the
first year of Elend's reign trying so hard to protect him. She'd
forced herself to focus only on her street side, the side that had
been trained to be ruthless, for that, she thought, would give her
the power to defend what she loved. Yet, Kelsier had shown her
another way to be powerful. And, that power was connected with the
nobility—with their intrigue, their beauty, and their clever
schemes. Vin had taken almost immediately to life at court, and that
had frightened her.
That's it, she
thought, smiling at another curtsying young girl. That's why I
always felt that this was wrong. I didn't have to work for it, so I
couldn't believe that I deserved it.
She'd spent sixteen
years on the streets—she'd earned that side of her. Yet, it had
taken her barely a month to adapt to noble life. It had seemed
impossible to her that something that came so easily could be as
important a part of herself as the years spent on the streets.
But it was.
I had to
confront this, she realized. Tindwyl tried to make me do it,
two years ago, but I wasn't ready.
She needed to prove
to herself not only that she could move among the nobility, but that
she belonged with them. Because that proved something much more
important: that the love she'd earned from Elend during those few
early months wasn't based on a falsehood.
It's . . .
true, Vin thought. I can be both. Why did it take me so long
to figure it out?
"Excuse me,
ladies," a voice said.
Vin smiled, turning
as the women parted to make way for Elend. Several of the younger
ones got dreamy expressions on their faces as they regarded Elend
with his warrior's body, his rugged beard, and his white imperial
uniform. Vin suppressed a huff of annoyance. She'd loved him
long before he'd become dreamy.
"Ladies,"
Elend said to the women, "as Lady Vin herself will be quick to
tell you, I'm rather ill-mannered. That, in itself, would be a very
small sin. Unfortunately, I'm also quite unconcerned about my own
disregard for propriety. So, therefore, I'm going to steal my wife
away from you all and selfishly monopolize her time. I'd apologize,
but that's not the sort of thing we barbarians do."
With that, and with
a smile, he held out his elbow to her. Vin smiled back, taking the
arm and allowing him to lead her away from the pack of women.
"Thought you
might want some room to breathe," Elend said. "I can only
imagine how it must make you feel to be surrounded by a virtual army
of puffballs."
"I appreciate
the rescue," Vin said, though it wasn't actually true. How was
Elend to know that she'd suddenly discovered that she fit in with
those puffballs? Besides, just because they wore frills and makeup
didn't mean they weren't dangerous—she'd learned that much
easily her first few months. The thought distracted her such that she
didn't notice where Elend was leading her until they were almost
there.
When she did
realize it, she stopped immediately, jerking Elend back. "The
dance floor?" she asked.
"Indeed,"
he said.
"But, I
haven't danced in almost four years!"
"Neither have
I," Elend said. He stepped closer. "But, it would be
terrible to miss the opportunity. After all, we never did get to
dance."
It was true.
Luthadel had gone into revolt before they'd gotten an opportunity to
dance together, and after that, there hadn't been time for balls or
frivolity. She knew Elend understood how much she missed not having
had the chance. He'd asked her to dance on the first night when
they'd met, and she'd turned him down. She still felt as if she'd
given up some unique opportunity on that first evening.
And so, she let him
lead her up onto the slightly raised dance floor. Couples whispered,
and as the song ended, everyone else furtively departed the dance
floor, leaving Vin and Elend alone—a figure in lines of white,
and another in curves of black. Elend put an arm at her waist,
turning her toward him, and Vin found herself traitorously nervous.
This is it, she
thought, flaring pewter to keep from shaking. It's finally
happening. I finally get to dance with him!
At that moment—as
the music began—Elend reached into his pocket and pulled out a
book. He raised it with one hand, the other on her waist, and began
to read.
Vin's jaw dropped,
then she whacked him on the arm. "What do you think you're
doing?" she demanded as he shuffled through the dance steps,
still holding his book. "Elend! I'm trying to have a special
moment here!"
He turned toward
her, smiling with a terribly mischievous grin. "Well, I want to
make that special moment as authentic as possible. I mean, you are
dancing with me, after all."
"For the first
time!"
"All the more
important to be certain that I make the right impression, Miss
Valette!"
"Oh, for . . .
Will you please just put the book away?"
Elend smiled more
deeply, but slid the book back into his pocket, taking her hand and
dancing with her in a more proper manner. Vin flushed as she saw the
confused crowd standing around the dance floor. They obviously had no
idea what to make of Elend's behavior.
"You are
a barbarian," Vin told him.
"A barbarian
because I read books?" Elend said lightly. "That's one that
Ham will have a great time with."
"Honestly,"
Vin said, "where did you even get a book here?"
"I had one of
Yomen's servants fetch it for me," Elend said. "From the
keep library. I knew they'd have it—Trials of Monument
is a rather famous work."
Vin frowned. "Do
I recognize that title?"
"It was the
book that I was reading that night on the Venture balcony,"
Elend said. "The time we first met."
"Why, Elend!
That's almost romantic—in a twisted 'I'm going to make my wife
want to kill me' sort of way."
"I thought
you'd appreciate it," he said, turning lightly.
"You're in
rare form tonight. I haven't seen you like this for quite some time."
"I know,"
he said, sighing. "To be honest, Vin, I feel a bit guilty. I'm
worried that I was too informal during my conversation with Yomen.
He's so stiff that my old instincts—the ones that always made
me respond to people like him with mockery—came out."
Vin let him lead
the dance, looking up at him. "You're just acting like yourself.
That's a good thing."
"My old self
didn't make a good king," Elend said.
"The things
you learned about kingship didn't have to do with your personality,
Elend," Vin said. "They had to do with other things—about
confidence, and about decisiveness. You can have those things and
still be yourself."
Elend shook his
head. "I'm not sure I can. Certainly, tonight, I should have
been more formal. I allowed the setting to make me lax."
"No," Vin
said firmly. "No, I'm right about this, Elend. You've
been doing the exact thing I have. You've been so determined to be a
good king that you've let it squish who you really are. Our
responsibilities shouldn't have to destroy us."
"They haven't
destroyed you," he said, smiling behind his short beard.
"They nearly
did," Vin said. "Elend, I had to realize that I could be
both people—the Mistborn of the streets and the woman of the
court. I had to acknowledge that the new person I'm becoming is a
valid extension of who I am. But for you, it's opposite! You have to
realize that who you were is still a valid part of you. That person
makes silly comments, and does things just to provoke a reaction.
But, he's also lovable and kindhearted. You can't lose those things
just because you're emperor."
He got that look in
his face, the thoughtful one, the one that meant he was going to
argue. Then, however, he hesitated.
"Coming to
this place," he said, looking at the beautiful windows and
watching the nobility, "it's reminded me of what I spent most of
my life doing. Before I had to be a king. Even then, I was trying to
do things my way—I went off and read during balls. But, I
didn't do it away in the library, I did it in the ballroom. I didn't
want to hide, I wanted to express discontent with my father, and
reading was my way."
"You were a
good man, Elend," Vin said. "Not an idiot, as you now seem
to think that you were. You were a little undirected, but still a
good leader. You took control of Luthadel and stopped the skaa from
committing a slaughter in their rebellion."
"But then, the
whole Penrod fiasco . . ."
"You had
things to learn," Vin said. "Like I did. But, please don't
become someone else, Elend. You can be both Elend the emperor and
Elend the man."
He smiled deeply,
then pulled her close, pausing their dance. "Thank you," he
said, then kissed her. She could tell that he hadn't made his
decision yet—he still thought that he needed to be more of a
hard warrior than a kind scholar. However, he was thinking. That was
enough, at the moment.
Vin looked up into
his eyes, and they returned to the dance. Neither spoke; they simply
let the wonder of the moment hold them. It was a surreal experience
for Vin. Their army was outside, the ash was falling perpetually, and
the mists were killing people. Yet, inside this room of white marble
and sparkling colors, she danced with the man she loved for the first
time.
They both spun with
the grace of Allomancy, stepping as if on the wind, moving as if made
of mist. The room grew hushed, the nobility like a theater audience,
watching some grand performance, not two people who hadn't danced in
years. And yet, Vin knew it was wonderful, something that had rarely
been seen. Most noble Mistborn couldn't afford to appear too
graceful, lest they give away their secret powers.
Vin and Elend had
no such inhibitions. They danced as if to make up for the four years
lost, as if to throw their joy in the face of an apocalyptic world
and a hostile city. The song began to wind down. Elend pulled her
against him, and her tin let her feel his heartbeat so close. It was
beating far more swiftly than a simple dance could account for.
"I'm glad we
did this," he said.
"There's
another ball soon," she said. "In a few weeks."
"I know,"
he said. "As I understand it, that ball is going to be held at
the Canton of Resource."
Vin nodded. "Thrown
by Yomen himself."
"And, if the
supply cache is hidden anywhere in the city, it will most likely be
beneath that building."
"We'd have an
excuse—and a precedent—to get in."
"Yomen has
some atium," Elend said. "He's wearing a bead of it on his
forehead. Though, just because he has one bead doesn't mean he has a
wealth of it."
Vin nodded. "I
wonder if he's found the storage cavern."
"He has,"
Elend said, "I'm sure of it. I got a reaction out of him when I
mentioned it."
"That still
shouldn't stop us," Vin said, smiling. "We go to his ball,
sneak into the cavern, find out what the Lord Ruler left there, then
decide what to do about the siege—and the city—based on
that?"
"Seems like a
good plan," Elend said. "Assuming I can't get him to listen
to reason. I was close, Vin. I can't help but think that
there might be a chance to bring him to our side."
She nodded.
"All right,
then," he said. "Ready to make a grand exit?"
Vin smiled, then
nodded. As the music ended, Elend spun and threw her to the side, and
she Pushed off of the metal dance floor rim. She shot out over the
crowd, guiding herself toward the exit, dress flapping.
Behind, Elend
addressed the crowd. "Thank you so much for letting us join you.
Anyone who wants to escape the city will be allowed passage through
my army."
Vin landed and saw
the crowd turn as Elend jumped over their heads, fortunately managing
to guide himself through the relatively low room without crashing
into any windows or hitting the ceiling. He joined her at the doors,
and they escaped through the antechamber and into the night.

Hemalurgy is of
Ruin. It destroys. By taking abilities from one person and giving
them to another—in reduced amounts—power is actually
lost. In line with Ruin's own appointed purpose—breaking down
the universe into smaller and smaller pieces—Hemalurgy gives
great gifts, but at a high cost.





33
HUMANS
MIGHT HAVE SCORNED TENSOON, perhaps throwing things at him
or yelling curses as he passed. Kandra were too orderly for that kind
of display, but TenSoon could feel their disdain. They watched as he
was taken from his cage, then led back to the Trustwarren for
judgment. Hundreds of eyes regarded him, set in bodies with bones of
steel, glass, rock, and wood. The younger kandra were more extreme in
form, the older were more orthodox.
All were
accusatory.
Before, at the
trial, the crowd had been curious—perhaps horrified. That had
changed; TenSoon's time spent in the display cage had worked as
intended. The Second Generation had been able to promote his infamy,
and kandra who had once, perhaps, been sympathetic to him now watched
with disgust. In a thousand years of history, the kandra had never
had a criminal such as TenSoon.
He bore the stares
and the scorn with a raised head, padding through the corridor in a
dog's body. It was strange to him, how natural the bones felt. He'd
only spent a year's time wearing them, but putting them on
again—discarding the scrawny, naked human body—felt more
like returning home than coming back to the Homeland had a year
before.
And so, what was
supposed to be a humiliation for him became, instead, something of a
triumph. It had been a wild hope, but he'd manipulated the Second
Generation into giving him back the dog's body. The sack had even
contained the body's hair and nails—likely, they had simply
collected the entire mess after forcing TenSoon to abandon it and
enter his prison a year ago.
The comfortable
bones gave him strength. This was the body that Vin had given him.
She was the Hero of Ages. He had to believe that.
Otherwise he was
about to make a very big mistake.
His guards led him
into the Trustwarren. This time, there were too many observers to fit
into the room, so the Seconds declared that those younger than the
Seventh Generation had to wait outside. Even so, kandra filled the
rows of stone seats. They sat silently as TenSoon was led to the
slightly raised metallic disk set into the center of the stone floor.
The broad doors were left open, and younger kandra crowded outside,
listening.
TenSoon looked up
as he stepped onto his platform. The lump-like shadows of the First
Generation waited above, each one in his separate alcove, backlit
faintly in blue.
KanPaar approached
his lectern. TenSoon could see the satisfaction in the way KanPaar
slid across the floor. The Second felt that his triumph was
complete—what happened to those who ignored the directives of
the Second Generation would not soon be forgotten. TenSoon settled
back on his haunches, guarded by two kandra with the Blessing of
Potency twinkling in each shoulder. They carried large mallets.
"TenSoon of
the Third Generation," KanPaar said loudly. "Are you ready
to bear the sentence of your judgment?"
"There will be
no judgment," TenSoon said. His words slurred, coming from the
dog's mouth, but they were clear enough to understand.
"No judgment?"
KanPaar asked, amused. "You now seek to back out of what you
yourself demanded?"
"I came to
give information, not to be judged."
"I—"
"I'm not
speaking to you, KanPaar," TenSoon said, turning from the Second
to look up. "I'm talking to them."
"They heard
your words, Third," KanPaar snapped. "Control yourself! I
will not let you turn this judgment into a circus, as you did
before."
TenSoon smiled.
Only a kandra would consider a mild argument to be a 'circus.'
TenSoon didn't turn away from the First Generation's alcoves,
however.
"Now,"
KanPaar said. "We—"
"You!"
TenSoon bellowed, causing KanPaar to sputter again. "First
Generation! How long will you sit in your comfortable home,
pretending that the world above doesn't exist? You think that if you
ignore the problems, they won't affect you? Or, is it that you've
stopped believing in your own teachings?
"The days of
mist have come! The endless ash now falls! The earth shakes and
trembles. You can condemn me, but you must not ignore me! The world
will soon die! If you want people—in all of their forms—to
survive, you must act! You must be ready! For you may soon need to
command our people to accept the Resolution!"
The room fell
silent. Several of the shadows above shuffled, as if
discomfited—though kandra generally didn't react in such a way.
It was too disorderly.
Then a voice—soft,
scratchy, and very tired—spoke from above. "Proceed,
KanPaar."
The comment was so
unexpected that several members of the audience actually gasped. The
First Generation never spoke in the presence of lessers. TenSoon
wasn't awed—he'd seen them, and talked with them, before they'd
grown too superior to deal with anyone but the Seconds. No, he wasn't
awed. He was just disappointed.
"My faith in
you was misplaced," he said, mostly to himself. "I should
not have returned."
"TenSoon of
the Third Generation!" KanPaar said, standing up straight,
crystalline True Body sparkling as he pointed. "You have been
sentenced to the ritual imprisonment of ChanGaar! You will be beaten
to the point of fracture, then bricked into a pit, with only one hole
for your daily slop. You will remain there for ten generations! Only
after that will you be executed by starvation! Know that your
greatest sin was that of rebellion. If you had not strayed from the
advice and wisdom of this council, you would never have thought it
right to break the First Contract. Because of you, the Trust has been
endangered, as has every kandra of every generation!"
KanPaar let the
pronouncement ring in the chamber. TenSoon sat quietly on his
haunches. KanPaar had obviously expected some kind of response from
him, but TenSoon gave none. Finally, KanPaar gestured to the guards
beside TenSoon, who hefted their fearsome hammers.
"You know,
KanPaar," TenSoon said, "I learned a few important things
while wearing these bones a year ago."
KanPaar gestured
again. The guards raised their weapons.
"It's
something I had never paused to consider," TenSoon said.
"Humans, if you think about it, just aren't built for speed.
Dogs, however, are."
The hammers fell.
TenSoon leaped
forward.
The powerful dog's
haunches launched him into motion. TenSoon was a member of the Third
Generation. Nobody had been eating and emulating bodies as long as he
had, and he knew how to pack muscles into a body. In addition, he had
spent a year wearing the bones of a wolfhound, being forced to try to
keep up with his Mistborn master. He had undergone what had
effectively been a year of training by one of the most talented
Allomancers the world had ever known.
On top of that, a
body mass that had translated from a scrawny human made quite a
substantial wolfhound. This, combined with his skill in crafting
bodies, meant that when TenSoon jumped, he jumped. His
guards cried out in shock as TenSoon sprang away, his leap taking him
at least ten feet across the room. He hit the ground running, but
didn't head for the door. They'd be expecting that.
Instead he sprang
directly toward KanPaar. The foremost of Seconds cried out, throwing
up ineffectual hands as a hundred pounds of wolfhound crashed into
him, throwing him to the stone floor. TenSoon heard sharp cracks as
KanPaar's delicate bones shattered, and KanPaar screamed in a very
un-kandra-like way.
That seems
appropriate, TenSoon thought, shoving his way through the ranks
of the Seconds, shattering bones. Honestly, what kind of vain
fool wears a True Body made of crystal?
Many of the kandra
didn't know how to react. Others—especially the younger
ones—had spent a lot of time around humans on Contracts, and
they were more accustomed to chaos. These scattered, leaving their
elder companions sitting on the benches in shock. TenSoon darted
between bodies, heading toward the doors. The guards beside the
podium—the ones who would have shattered his bones—rushed
to KanPaar's side, their filial sense of duty overriding their desire
to prevent his escape. Besides, they must have seen the crowd
clogging the doorway, and assumed that TenSoon would be slowed.
As soon as he
reached the crowd, TenSoon jumped again. Vin had required him to be
able to leap incredible heights, and he'd practiced with many
different muscle structures. This jump wouldn't have impressed
Vin—TenSoon no longer had the Blessing of Potency he'd stolen
from OreSeur—but it was more than enough to let him clear the
watching kandra. Some cried out, and he landed in a pocket of open
space, then leaped again toward the open cavern beyond.
"No!" he
heard echoing from the Trustwarren. "Go after him!"
TenSoon took off in
a loping dash down one of the corridors. He ran quickly—far
more quickly than anything bipedal could have managed. With his
canine body, he hoped he'd be able to outrun even kandra bearing the
Blessing of Potency.
Farewell, my
home, TenSoon thought, leaving the main cavern behind. And
farewell to what little honor I had left.






PART THREE
THE BROKEN SKIES
Feruchemy, it
should be noted, is the power of balance. Of the three powers, only
it was known to men before the conflict between Preservation and Ruin
came to a head. In Feruchemy, power is stored up, then later drawn
upon. There is no loss of energy—just a changing of the time
and rate of its use.





34
MARSH
STRODE INTO THE SMALL TOWN. Workers atop the makeshift
gate—which looked flimsy enough that a determined knock would
send it toppling—froze in place. Ash sweepers noticed him pass
with shock, then horror. It was odd, how they watched, too terrified
to flee. Or, at least, too terrified to be the first one to flee.
Marsh ignored them.
The earth trembled beneath him in a beautiful song—quakes were
common, here, in the shadow of Mount Tyrian. It was the ashmount
closest to Luthadel. Marsh walked through Elend Venture's own
territory. But, of course, the emperor had abandoned it. That seemed
an invitation to Marsh, and to the one who controlled him. They were
really the same. Marsh smiled as he walked.
A small piece of
him was still free. He let it sleep, however. Ruin needed to think he
had given up. That was the point. And so, Marsh held back only a tiny
bit, and he did not fight. He let the ashen sky become a thing of
bespeckled beauty, and treated the death of the world as a blessed
event.
Biding his time.
Waiting.
The village was an
inspiring sight. The people were starving here, even though they were
within the Central Dominance: Elend Venture's "protected"
area. They had the wonderful, haunted expressions of those who were
close to giving up hope. The streets were barely maintained, the
homes—which had once been the dwellings of noblemen, but were
now filled with hungry skaa—covered in ash, their gardens
stripped and their structures cannibalized to feed fires during the
winter.
The gorgeous sight
made Marsh smile with satisfaction. Behind him, people finally
started to move, fleeing, doors slamming. There were probably some
six or seven thousand people living in the town. They were not
Marsh's concern. Not at the moment.
He was interested
only in a single, specific building. It looked little different from
the others, a mansion in a fine row. The town had once been a
stopping place for travelers, and had grown to be a favored place for
nobility to construct second homes. A few noble families had lived
here permanently, overseeing the many skaa who had worked the
plantations and fields on the plains outside.
The building Marsh
chose was slightly better maintained than those around it. The garden
was, of course, more weeds than cultivation, and the outer mansion
walls hadn't seen a good scrubbing in years. However, fewer sections
of it looked to have been broken apart for firewood, and a guard
actually stood watch at the front gate.
Marsh killed him
with one of the razor-sharp metal triangles that had once been used
in the Lord Ruler's ceremonies. Marsh Pushed it through the guard's
chest even as the man opened his mouth in challenge. The air was
oddly still and quiet as the guard's voice cut off, and he toppled to
the side in the road. The skaa who watched from nearby homes knew
better than to react, and didn't stir.
Marsh hummed to
himself as he strolled up the front walk to the mansion, startling a
small flock of ravens who had come to roost. Once this path would
have been a calming stroll through gardens, the way marked by
flagstones. Now it was simply a hike through a weed-filled field. The
man who owned the place obviously couldn't afford more than the lone
gate guard, and nobody raised an alarm at Marsh's approach. He was
actually able to walk right up to the front doors. Smiling to
himself, he knocked.
A maidservant
opened the doors. She froze when she saw Marsh, taking in his spiked
eyes, his unnaturally tall figure, his dark robes. Then she began to
tremble.
Marsh held out a
hand, palm up, with another of the triangles. Then he Pushed it
straight into her face. It snapped out the back of the skull, and the
woman toppled. He stepped over her body and entered the house.
It was far nicer
inside than the exterior had led him to expect. Rich furnishings,
freshly painted walls, intricate ceramics. Marsh raised an eyebrow,
scanning the room with his spiked eyes. The way his sight worked, it
was hard for him to distinguish colors, but he was familiar enough
with his powers now that he could pick them out if he wanted. The
Allomantic lines from the metals inside of most things were really
quite expressive.
To Marsh, the
mansion was a place of pristine whiteness and bright blobs of
expensive color. Marsh searched through it, burning pewter to enhance
his physical abilities, allowing him to walk much more lightly than
would otherwise have been possible. He killed two more servants in
the course of his exploration, and eventually moved up to the second
floor.
He found the man he
wanted sitting at a desk in a top-floor room. Balding, wearing a rich
suit. He had a petite mustache set in a round face, and was slumped,
eyes closed, a bottle of hard liquor empty at his feet. Marsh saw
this with displeasure.
"I come all
this way to get you," Marsh said. "And when I finally find
you, I discover that you have intoxicated yourself into a stupor?"
The man had never
met Marsh, of course. That didn't stop Marsh from feeling annoyed
that he wouldn't be able to see the look of terror and surprise in
the man's eyes when he found an Inquisitor in his home. Marsh would
miss out on the fear, the anticipation of death. Briefly, Marsh was
tempted to wait until the man sobered up so that the killing could be
performed properly.
But, Ruin would
have none of that. Marsh sighed at the injustice of it, then slammed
the unconscious man down against the floor and drove a small bronze
spike through his heart. It wasn't as large or thick as an Inquisitor
spike, but it killed just as well. Marsh ripped it out of the man's
heart, leaving the former nobleman dead, blood pooling on the floor.
Then, Marsh walked
out, leaving the building. The nobleman—Marsh didn't even know
his name—had used Allomancy recently. The man was a Smoker, a
Misting who could create copperclouds, and the use of his ability had
drawn Ruin's attention. Ruin had been wanting an Allomancer to drain.
And so, Marsh had
come to harvest the man's power and draw it into the spike. It seemed
something of a waste to him. Hemalurgy—particularly Allomantic
imbues—was much more potent when one could drive the spike
through the victim's heart and directly into a waiting host. That
way, very little of the Allomantic ability was lost. Doing it this
way—killing the Allomancer to make a spike, then traveling
somewhere else to place it—would grant the new host far less
power.
But, there was no
getting around it in this case. Marsh shook his head as he stepped
over the maidservant's body again, moving out into the unkempt
gardens. No one accosted, or even looked at, him as he made his way
to the front gates. There, however, he was surprised to find a couple
of skaa men kneeling on the ground.
"Please, Your
Grace," one said as Marsh passed. "Please, send the
obligators back to us. We will serve better this time."
"You have lost
that opportunity," Marsh said, staring at them with his
spike-heads.
"We will
believe in the Lord Ruler again," another said. "He fed us.
Please. Our families have no food."
"Well,"
Marsh said. "You needn't worry about that for long."
The men knelt,
confused, as Marsh left. He didn't kill them, though part of him
wished to. Unfortunately, Ruin wanted to claim that privilege for
himself.
Marsh walked across
the plain outside the town. After about an hour's time he stopped,
turning to look back at the community and the towering ashmount
behind it.
At that moment, the
top left half of the mountain exploded, spewing a deluge of dust,
ash, and rock. The earth shook, and a booming sound washed over
Marsh. Then, flaming hot and red, a large gout of magma began to flow
down the side of the ashmount toward the plain.
Marsh shook his
head. Yes. Food was hardly this town's biggest problem. They
really needed to get their priorities straight.

Hemalurgy is a
power about which I wish I knew far less. To Ruin, power must have an
inordinately high cost—using it must be attractive, yet must
sow chaos and destruction in its very implementation.
In concept, it
is a very simple art. A parasitic one. Without other people to steal
from, Hemalurgy would be useless.





35
"YOU'LL
BE ALL RIGHT HERE?" Spook asked.
Breeze turned away
from the brightened tavern, raising an eyebrow. Spook had brought
him—along with several of Goradel's soldiers in street
clothing—to one of the larger, more reputable locations. Voices
rang within.
"Yes, this
should be fine," Breeze said, eyeing the tavern. "Skaa out
at night. Never thought I'd see that. Perhaps the world really is
ending. . . ."
"I'm going to
go to one of the poorer sections of town," Spook said quietly.
"There are some things I want to check on."
"Poorer
sections," Breeze said musingly. "Perhaps I should
accompany you. I've found that the poorer people are, the more likely
they are to let their tongues wag."
Spook raised an
eyebrow. "No offense, Breeze, but I kind of think you'd stand
out."
"What?"
Breeze asked, nodding toward his utilitarian brown worker's
outfit—quite a change from his usual suit and vest. "I'm
wearing these dreadful clothes, aren't I?"
"Clothing
isn't everything, Breeze. You've kind of got a . . . bearing about
you. Plus, you don't have much ash on you."
"I was
infiltrating the lower ranks before you were born, child,"
Breeze said, wagging a finger at him.
"All right,"
Spook said. He reached to the ground, scooping up a pile of ash.
"Let's just rub this into your clothing and on your face. . . ."
Breeze froze. "I'll
meet you back at the lair," he finally said.
Spook smiled,
dropping the ash as he disappeared into the mists.
"I never did
like him," Kelsier whispered.
Spook left the
richer section of town, moving at a brisk pace. When he hit the
streetslot, he didn't stop, but simply leaped off the side of the
road and plummeted twenty feet.
His cloak flapped
behind him as he fell. He landed easily and continued his quick pace.
Without pewter, he would certainly have broken some limbs. Now he
moved with the same dexterity he'd once envied in Vin and Kelsier. He
felt exhilarated. With pewter flaring inside of him, he never felt
tired—never even felt fatigued. Even simple acts, like walking
down the street, made him feel full of grace and power.
He moved quickly to
the Harrows, leaving behind the streets of better men, entering the
cluttered, overpacked alley-like streetslot, knowing exactly where
he'd find his quarry. Durn was one of the leading figures in the
Urteau underworld. Part informant, part beggar lord, the unfulfilled
musician had become a sort of a mayor of the Harrows. Men like that
had to be where people could find—and pay—them.
Spook still
remembered that first night after waking from his fevers a few weeks
back, the night when he'd visited a tavern and heard men talking
about him. Over the next few days, he'd visited several other
taverns, and had heard others mention rumors that spoke of Spook.
Sazed and Breeze's arrival had kept Spook from confronting Durn—the
apparent source of the rumors—about what he'd been telling
people. It was time to correct that oversight.
Spook picked up his
pace, leaping heaps of discarded boards, dashing around piles of ash,
until he reached the hole that Durn called home. It was a section of
canal wall that had been hollowed out to form a kind of cave. Though
the wooden framing around the door looked as rotted and splintered as
everything else in the Harrows, Spook knew it to be reinforced on the
back with a thick oaken bar.
Two brutes sat
watch outside. They eyed Spook as he stopped in front of the door,
cloak whipping around him. It was the same one he'd been wearing when
he'd been tossed into the fire, and it was still spotted with burn
marks and holes.
"The boss
isn't seeing anyone right now, kid," said one of the big men,
not rising from his seat. "Come back later."
Spook kicked the
door. It broke free, its hinges snapping, the bar shattering its
mountings and tumbling backward.
Spook stood for a
moment, shocked. He had too little experience with pewter to gauge
its use accurately. If he was shocked, however, the two brutes were
stunned. They sat, staring at the broken door.
"You may need
to kill them," Kelsier whispered.
No, Spook
thought. I just have to move quickly. He dashed into the
open hallway, needing no torch or lantern by which to see. He whipped
spectacles and a cloth out of his pocket as he approached the door at
the end of the hallway, fixing them in place even as the guards
called out behind him.
He threw his
shoulder against the door with a bit more care, slamming it open but
not breaking it. He moved into a well-lit room where four men sat
playing chips at a table. Durn was winning.
Spook pointed at
the men as he skidded to a stop. "You three. Out. Durn and I
have business."
Durn sat at the
table, looking genuinely surprised. The brutes rushed up behind
Spook, and he turned, falling to a crouch, reaching under his cloak
for his dueling cane.
"It's all
right," Durn said, standing. "Leave us."
The guards
hesitated, obviously angry at being passed so easily. Finally,
however, they withdrew, Durn's gambling partners going with them. The
door closed.
"That was
quite the entrance," Durn noted, sitting back down at his table.
"You've been
talking about me, Durn," Spook said, turning. "I've heard
people discussing me in taverns, mentioning your name. You've been
spreading rumors about my death, telling people that I was on the
Survivor's crew. How did you know who I was, and why have you been
using my name?"
"Oh, come
now," Durn said, scowling. "How anonymous did you think you
were? You're the Survivor's friend, and you spend a good half your
time living in the emperor's own palace."
"Luthadel's a
long way from here."
"Not so far
that news doesn't travel," Durn said. "A Tineye comes to
town, spying about, flaunting seemingly endless funds? It wasn't
really that hard to figure out who you were. Besides, there's your
eyes."
"What about
them?" Spook asked.
The ugly man
shrugged. "Everyone knows that strange things happen around the
Survivor's crew."
Spook wasn't
certain what to make of that. He walked forward, looking over the
cards on the table. He picked one up, feeling its paper. His
heightened senses let him feel the bumps on the back.
"Marked
cards?" he asked.
"Of course,"
Durn said. "Practice game, to see if my men could read the
patterns right."
Spook tossed the
card onto the table. "You still haven't told me why you've been
spreading rumors about me."
"No offense,
kid," Durn said. "But . . . well, you're supposed to be
dead."
"If you
believed that, then why bother talking about me?"
"Why do you
think?" Durn said. "The people love the Survivor—and
anything related to him. That's why Quellion uses his name so often.
But, if I could show that Quellion killed one of Kelsier's own crew .
. . well, there are a lot of people in this city who wouldn't like
that."
"So, you're
just trying to help," Spook said flatly. "Out of the
goodness of your heart."
"You're not
the only one who thinks that Quellion is killing this city. If you're
really of the Survivor's crew, you'll know that sometimes, people
fight."
"I find it
difficult to think of you as an altruist, Durn. You're a thief."
"So are you."
"We didn't
know what we were getting into," Spook said. "Kelsier
promised us riches. How do you gain from all this?"
Durn snorted. "The
Citizen is very bad for business. Venture red wine being sold for a
fraction of a clip? Our smuggling has been choked to a trickle
because everyone fears buying our goods. Things were never
this bad under the Lord Ruler." He leaned in. "If your
friends staying in the old Ministry building think they can do
something about that lunatic running this city, then tell them
they'll have my support. There isn't a large underground left in this
city, but Quellion will be surprised at the damage it can do if
manipulated the right way."
Spook stood quietly
for a moment. "There's a man milking for information in the
tavern on Westbrook Lane. Send someone to contact him. He's a
Soother—the best one you'll ever meet—but he stands out a
bit. Make your offer to him."
Durn nodded.
Spook turned to go,
then glanced back at Durn. "Don't mention my name to him, or
what happened to me."
With that, he left
through the hallway, passing the guards and the displaced crooks from
the card game. Spook pulled off his blindfold as he stepped into the
daylight-like brightness of the starlit night.
He strolled through
the Harrows, trying to decide what he thought of the meeting. Durn
hadn't revealed anything all that important. Yet, Spook felt
as if something were happening around him, something he hadn't
planned on, something he couldn't quite decipher. He was becoming
more comfortable with Kelsier's voice, and with his pewter, but he
was still worried that he wouldn't be able to live up to the position
he'd fallen into.
"If you don't
get to Quellion soon," Kelsier said, "he's going to find
your friends. He's already preparing assassins."
"He won't send
them," Spook said quietly. "Especially if he's heard Durn's
rumors about me. Everyone knows that Sazed and Breeze were on your
crew. Quellion won't take them out unless they prove to be such a
threat that he has no other choice."
"Quellion is
an unstable man," Kelsier said. "Don't wait too long. You
don't want to find out how irrational he can be."
Spook fell silent.
Then, he heard footsteps, approaching quickly. He felt the vibrations
in the ground. He spun and loosened his cloak, reaching for his
weapon.
"You're not in
danger," Kelsier said quietly.
Spook relaxed as
someone rushed around the alley corner. It was one of the men from
Durn's chips game. The man was puffing, his face flush with
exhaustion. "My lord!" he said.
"I'm no lord,"
Spook said. "What happened? Is Durn in danger?"
"No, sir,"
the man said. "I just . . . I . . ."
Spook raised an
eyebrow.
"I need your
help," the man said between breaths. "When we realized who
you were, you were already gone. I just . . ."
"Help with
what?" Spook said tersely.
"My sister,
sir," the man said. "She got taken by the Citizen. Our . .
. father was a nobleman. Durn hid me, but Mailey, she got sold by the
woman I'd left her with. Sir, she's only seven. He's going to burn
her in a few days!"
Spook frowned. What
does he expect me to do? He opened his mouth to ask that very
question, but then stopped. He wasn't the same man anymore. He wasn't
limited as the old Spook would have been. He could do something else.
What Kelsier would
have done.
"Can you
gather ten men?" Spook asked. "Friends of yours, willing to
take part in some late-night work?"
"Sure. I
guess. Does this have to do with saving Mailey?"
"No,"
Spook said. "It has to do with your payment for saving Mailey.
Get me those workers, and I'll do what I can to help your sister."
The man nodded
eagerly.
"Do it now,"
Spook said, pointing. "We start tonight."

In Hemalurgy,
the type of metal used in a spike is important, as is the positioning
of that spike on the body. For instance, steel spikes take physical
Allomantic powers—the ability to burn pewter, tin, steel, or
iron—and bestow them upon the person receiving the spike. Which
of these four is granted, however, depends on where the spike is
placed.
Spikes made
from other metals steal Feruchemical abilities. For example, all of
the original Inquisitors were given a pewter spike, which—after
first being pounded through the body of a Feruchemist—gave the
Inquisitor the ability to store up healing power. (Though they
couldn't do so as quickly as a real Feruchemist, as per the law of
Hemalurgic decay.) This, obviously, is where the Inquisitors got
their infamous ability to recover from wounds quickly, and was also
why they needed to rest so much.





36
"YOU
SHOULDN'T HAVE GONE IN," Cett said flatly.
Elend raised an
eyebrow, riding his stallion through the center of his camp. Tindwyl
had taught him that it was good to be seen by one's people,
especially in situations where he could control the way he was
perceived. He happened to agree with this particular lesson, and so
he rode, wearing a black cloak to mask the ash's smudges, making
certain his soldiers knew that he was among them. Cett rode with him,
tied into his specially made saddle.
"You think I
put myself in too much danger by entering the city?" Elend
asked, nodding to a group of soldiers who had paused in their morning
labors to salute him.
"No,"
Cett said, "we both know that I don't give a damn whether you
live or die, boy. Besides, you're Mistborn. You could have gotten out
if things turned dangerous."
"Why, then?"
Elend asked. "Why was it a mistake?"
"Because,"
Cett said. "You met the people inside. You talked with them,
danced among them. Hell, boy. Can't you see why that's such a
problem? When the time comes to attack, you'll worry about people
you're going to hurt."
Elend rode in
silence for a moment. The morning mists were a normal thing to him
now. They obscured the camp, masking its size. Even to his
tin-enhanced eyes, distant tents became silhouetted lumps. It was as
if he rode through some mythical world, a place of muffled shadows
and distant noises.
Had it been a
mistake for him to enter the city? Perhaps. Elend knew the theories
Cett spoke of—he understood how important it was for a general
to view his enemies not as individuals, but as numbers. Obstacles.
"I'm glad for
my choice," Elend said.
"I know,"
Cett said, scratching at his thick beard. "That's what
frustrates me, to be honest. You're a compassionate man. That's a
weakness, but it isn't the real problem. The problem is your
inability to deal with your own compassion."
Elend raised an
eyebrow.
"You should
know better than to let yourself grow attached to your enemy, Elend,"
Cett said. "You should have known how you would react, and
planned so that you could avoid this very situation! Hell, boy, every
leader has weaknesses—the ones who win are the ones who learn
how to smother those weaknesses, not give them fuel!" When Elend
didn't respond to that, Cett simply sighed. "All right, then,
let's talk about the siege. The engineers have blocked off several
streams that lead into the city, but they don't think those were the
primary sources of water."
"They
weren't," Elend said. "Vin has located six main wells
within the city itself."
"We should
poison them," Cett said.
Elend fell silent.
The two halves of him still warred inside. The man he had been just
wanted to protect as many people as possible. The man he was
becoming, however, was more realistic. It knew that sometimes he had
to kill—or at least discomfort—in order to save.
"Very well,"
Elend said. "I'll have Vin do it tonight—and I'll have her
leave a message written on the wells saying what we've done."
"What good
will that do?" Cett asked, frowning.
"I don't want
to kill the people, Cett," Elend said, "I want to worry
them. This way, they'll go to Yomen for water. With the entire city
making demands, he should go through the water supply in his storage
cache pretty quickly."
Cett grunted. He
seemed pleased, however, that Elend had taken his suggestion. "And
the surrounding villages?"
"Feel free to
bully them," Elend said. "Organize a force of ten thousand,
and send them out to harass—but not kill. I want Yomen's spies
in the area to send him worried notes about his kingdom collapsing."
"You're trying
to play this halfway, lad," Cett said. "Eventually, you'll
have to choose. If Yomen doesn't surrender, you'll have to attack."
Elend reined in his
horse outside the command tent. "I know," he said softly.
Cett snorted, but
he fell silent as servants came out of the tent to unstrap him from
the saddle. As they started, however, the earth began to tremble.
Elend cursed, struggling to maintain control of his horse as it grew
skittish. The shaking rattled tents, knocking poles free and
collapsing a couple of them, and Elend heard the clang of metal as
cups, swords, and other items were knocked to the ground. Eventually,
the rumbling subsided, and he glanced to the side, checking on Cett.
The man had managed to keep control of his mount, though one of his
useless legs swung free from the saddle, and he looked as if he was
about to fall off. His servants rushed to his side to help.
"Damn things
are growing more and more frequent," Cett said.
Elend calmed his
horse, which stood puffing in the mists. Around the camp, men cursed
and yelled, dealing with the aftermath of the earthquake. They were
indeed growing more frequent; the last one had only been a few weeks
before. Earthquakes weren't supposed to be common in the Final
Empire—during his youth, he'd never heard of one happening in
the inner dominances.
He sighed, climbing
from his horse and handing the beast off to an aide, then followed
Cett into the command tent. The servants sat Cett in a chair, then
retreated, leaving the two of them alone. Cett glanced up at Elend,
looking troubled. "Did that fool Ham tell you about the news
from Luthadel?"
"Or the lack
of it?" Elend asked, sighing. "Yes." Not a peep had
come from the capital city, let alone the supplies Elend had ordered
brought down the canal.
"We don't have
that much time, Elend," Cett said quietly. "A few
months, at most. Time enough to weaken Yomen's resolve, perhaps make
his people get so thirsty that they begin to look forward to
invasion. But, if we don't get resupplied, there's no way we'll be
able to maintain this siege."
Elend glanced at
the older man. Cett sat in his chair with an arrogant expression,
looking back at Elend, meeting his eyes. So much about what the
crippled man did was about posturing—Cett had lost the use of
his legs to disease long ago, and he couldn't intimidate people
physically. So, he had to find other ways to make himself
threatening.
Cett knew how to
hit where it hurt. He could pick at the very faults that bothered
people and exploit their virtues in ways that Elend had rarely seen
even accomplished Soothers manage. And he did all this while covering
up a heart that Elend suspected was far softer than Cett would ever
admit.
He seemed
particularly on edge this day. As if worried about something.
Something important to him—something he'd been forced to leave
behind, perhaps?
"She'll be all
right, Cett," Elend said. "Nothing will happen to Allrianne
while she's with Sazed and Breeze."
Cett snorted,
waving an indifferent hand—though he did look away. "I'm
better off without the damn fool of a girl around. Let that Soother
have her, I say! Anyway, we're not talking about me, we're talking
about you and this siege!"
"Your points
have been noted, Cett," Elend said. "We will attack if I
deem it necessary." As he spoke, the tent flaps parted, and Ham
sauntered in, accompanied by a figure Elend hadn't seen in several
weeks—at least not out of bed.
"Demoux!"
Elend said, approaching the general. "You're up and about!"
"Barely, Your
Majesty," Demoux said. He did still look pale. "However, I
have recovered enough strength to move around a bit."
"The others?"
Elend asked.
Ham nodded. "Mostly
up and about as well. Demoux is among the last batch. A few more
days, and the army will be back to full strength."
Minus those who
died, Elend thought.
Cett eyed Demoux.
"Most of the men recovered weeks ago. A bit weaker in the
constitution than one might expect, eh, Demoux? That's what I've been
hearing, at least."
Demoux blushed.
Elend frowned at
this. "What?"
"It is
nothing, Your Majesty," Demoux said.
"It's never
'nothing' in my camp, Demoux," Elend said. "What am I
missing?"
Ham sighed, pulling
over a chair. He sat on it backward, resting his muscular arms across
its back. "It's just a rumor moving through the camp, El."
"Soldiers,"
Cett said. "They're all the same—superstitious as
housewives."
Ham nodded. "Some
of them have gotten it into their heads that the men who got sick
from the mists were being punished."
"Punished?"
Elend asked. "For what?"
"Lack of
faith, Your Majesty," Demoux said.
"Nonsense,"
Elend said. "We all know that the mists struck randomly."
The others shared
looks, and Elend had to pause and reconsider. No. The strikes
weren't random—at least, the statistics surrounding
them weren't. "Regardless," he said, deciding to
change the subject, "what are your daily reports?"
The three men took
turns talking about their various duties in the bivouac. Ham saw to
morale and training, Demoux to supplies and camp duties, Cett to
tactics and patrols. Elend stood with hands clasped behind his back,
listening to the reports, but only with half an ear. They weren't
much different from the previous day, though it was good to see
Demoux back at his duties. He was far more efficient than his
assistants.
As they talked,
Elend's mind wandered. The siege was going fairly well, but a part of
him—the part trained by Cett and Tindwyl—chafed at the
waiting game. He might just be able to take the city straight out. He
had koloss, and all accounts said that his troops were far more
experienced than those inside of Fadrex. The rock formations would
provide cover for the defenders, but Elend wasn't in so bad a
position that he couldn't win.
But doing so would
cost many, many lives.
That was the step
he balked at—the last step that would take him from defender to
aggressor. From protector to conqueror. And he was frustrated at his
own hesitation.
There was another
reason going into the city had been bad for Elend. It had been better
for Elend to think of Yomen as an evil tyrant, a corrupt obligator
loyal to the Lord Ruler. Now, unfortunately, he knew Yomen to be a
reasonable man. And one with very good arguments. In a way, his
indictment of Elend was true. Elend was a hypocrite. He
spoke of democracy, yet he had taken his throne by force.
It was what the
people had needed from him, he believed. But it did make him a
hypocrite. Still, by that same logic, he knew he should send Vin to
assassinate Yomen. But, could Elend order the death of a man who had
done nothing wrong besides getting in his way?
Assassinating the
obligator seemed as twisted an action as sending his koloss to attack
the city. Cett is right, Elend thought. I'm trying to
play both sides on this one. For a moment, while talking to
Telden during the ball, he had felt so sure of himself. And, in
truth, he still believed what he'd claimed. Elend wasn't the
Lord Ruler. He did give his people more freedom and more
justice.
However, he
realized that this siege could tip the balance between who he was and
who he feared he would become. Could he really justify invading
Fadrex, slaughtering its armies and pillaging its resources, all
ostensibly in the name of protecting the people of the empire? Could
he dare do the opposite: back away from Fadrex, and leave the secrets
in that cavern—the secrets that could potentially save the
entire empire—to a man who still thought the Lord Ruler would
return to save his people?
He wasn't ready to
decide. For now, he was determined to exhaust every other option.
Anything that would keep him from needing to invade the city. That
included besieging the city to make Yomen more pliant. That also
included sneaking Vin into the storage cavern. Her reports indicated
that the building was very heavily guarded. She wasn't certain if she
could get into it on an ordinary night. However, during a ball,
defenses might be more porous. It would be the perfect time to try to
get a glimpse at what was hidden in that cavern.
Assuming Yomen
hasn't simply removed the Lord Ruler's last inscription, Elend
thought. Or that there was even something there in the first
place.
Yet, there was a
chance. The Lord Ruler's final message, the last bit of help he had
left for his people. If Elend could find a way to get that help
without breaking his way into the city, killing thousands, he would
take it.
Eventually, the men
finished with their reports, and Elend dismissed them. Ham went
quickly, wanting to get in on a morning sparring session. Cett was
gone a few moments later, carried back to his own tent. Demoux,
however, lingered. It was sometimes hard to remember just how young
Demoux was—barely older than Elend himself. The balding scalp
and numerous scars made the man look much older than he was, as did
the still-visible effects of his extended illness.
Demoux was hesitant
about something. Elend waited, and finally the man dropped his eyes,
looking embarrassed. "Your Majesty," he said, "I feel
that I must ask to be released from my post as general."
"And why do
you say that?" Elend asked carefully.
"I don't think
I'm worthy of the position anymore."
Elend frowned.
"Only a man
trusted by the Survivor should command in this army, my lord,"
Demoux said.
"I'm sure that
he does trust you, Demoux."
Demoux shook his
head. "Then why did he give me the sickness? Why pick me, of all
the men in the army?"
"I've told
you, it was random luck, Demoux."
"My lord,"
Demoux said, "I hate to disagree, but we both know that isn't
true. After all, you were the one who pointed out that those who fell
sick did so at Kelsier's will."
Elend paused. "I
did?"
Demoux nodded. "On
that morning when we exposed our army to the mists, you shouted out
for them to remember that Kelsier is the Lord of the Mists, and that
the sickness must—therefore—be his will. I think you were
right. The Survivor is Lord of the Mists. He proclaimed it
so himself, during the nights before he died. He's behind the
sickness, my lord. I know he is. He saw those who lacked faith, and
he cursed them."
"That isn't
what I meant, Demoux," Elend said. "I was implying that
Kelsier wanted us to suffer this setback, but not that he was
targeting specific individuals."
"Either way,
my lord, you said the words."
Elend waved his
hand dismissively.
"Then how do
you explain the strange numbers, my lord?" Demoux asked.
"I'm not
sure," Elend said. "I'll admit that the number of people
who fell sick does produce an odd statistic, but that doesn't say
anything about you specifically, Demoux."
"I don't mean
that number, my lord," Demoux said, still looking down. "I
mean the number who remained sick while the others recovered."
Elend paused.
"Wait. What is this?"
"Haven't you
heard, my lord?" Demoux asked in the quiet tent. "The
scribes have been talking about it, and it's gotten around to the
army. I don't think that most of them understand the numbers and
such, but they understand that something strange is
happening."
"What
numbers?" Elend asked.
"Five thousand
people got taken by the sickness, my lord," Demoux said.
Exactly sixteen
percent of the army, Elend thought.
"Of those,
some five hundred died," Demoux said. "Of those remaining,
almost everyone recovered in one day."
"But some
didn't," Elend said. "Like you."
"Like me,"
Demoux said softly. "Three hundred and twenty-seven of us
remained sick when the others got better."
"So?"
Elend asked.
"That's
exactly one-sixteenth of those who fell to the sickness, my lord,"
Demoux said. "And we stayed sick exactly sixteen days.
To the hour."
The tent flap
rustled quietly in the breeze. Elend fell quiet, and couldn't
completely suppress a shiver. "Coincidence," he finally
said. "Statisticians looking for connections can always
find odd coincidences and statistical anomalies, if they try hard
enough."
"This doesn't
seem like a simple anomaly, my lord," Demoux said. "It's
precise. The same number keeps showing up, over and over. Sixteen."
Elend shook his
head. "Even if it does, Demoux, it doesn't mean
anything. It's just a number."
"It's the
number of months the Survivor spent in the Pits of Hathsin,"
Demoux said.
"Coincidence."
"It's how old
Lady Vin was when she became Mistborn."
"Again,
coincidence," Elend said.
"There seem to
be an awful lot of coincidences related to this, my lord,"
Demoux said.
Elend frowned,
folding his arms. Demoux was right on that point. My denials are
getting us nowhere. I need to know what people are thinking, not just
contradict them.
"All right,
Demoux," Elend said. "Let's say that none of these things
are coincidences. You seem to have a theory of what they mean."
"It's what I
said earlier, my lord," Demoux said. "The mists are of the
Survivor. They take certain people and kill them, others of us they
make sick—leaving the number sixteen as a proof that he really
was behind the event. So, therefore, the people who grow the most
sick are the ones who have displeased him the most."
"Well, except
for the ones who died from the sickness," Elend noted.
"True,"
Demoux said, looking up. "So . . . maybe there's hope for me."
"That wasn't
supposed to be a comforting comment, Demoux. I still don't accept all
of this. Perhaps there are oddities, but your interpretation
is based on speculation. Why would the Survivor be displeased with
you? You're one of his most faithful priests."
"I took the
position for myself, my lord," Demoux said. "He didn't
choose me. I just . . . started teaching what I'd seen, and people
listened to me. That must be what I did to offend him. If he'd wanted
that from me, he'd have chosen me when he was alive, don't you
think?"
I don't think
the Survivor cared much about this when he was alive, Elend
thought. He just wanted to stir up enough anger in the skaa that
they would rebel.
"Demoux,"
Elend said, "you know that the Survivor didn't organize this
religion when he was alive. Only men and women like you—those
who looked toward his teachings after he died—have
been able to build up a community of the faithful."
"True,"
Demoux. "But he did appear to some people after his
death. I wasn't one of those people."
"He didn't
appear to anyone," Elend said. "That was OreSeur the kandra
wearing his body. You know that, Demoux."
"Yes,"
Demoux said. "But, that kandra acted at the Survivor's request.
And, I wasn't on the list to get visited."
Elend laid a hand
on Demoux's shoulder, looking in the man's eyes. He had seen the
general, worn and grizzled beyond his age, determinedly stare down a
savage koloss a full five feet taller than he was. Demoux was not a
weak man, either in body or in faith.
"Demoux,"
Elend said, "I mean this in the kindest way, but your self-pity
is getting in the way. If these mists took you, then we need
to use that as proof that their effects have nothing to do
with Kelsier's displeasure. We don't have time for you to question
yourself right now—we both know you're twice as devoted as any
other man in this army."
Demoux flushed.
"Think about
it," Elend said, giving Demoux a little extra Allomantic shove
in the emotions, "in you, we have obvious proof that a person's
faithfulness has nothing to do with whether or not they're taken by
the mists. So, rather than letting you mope, we need to move on and
find the real reason the mists are behaving as they are."
Demoux stood for a
moment, then finally nodded. "Perhaps you're right, my lord.
Maybe I'm jumping to conclusions."
Elend smiled. Then,
he paused, thinking about his own words. Obvious proof that a
person's faithfulness has nothing to do with whether they're taken by
the mists. . . .
It wasn't exactly
true. Demoux was one of the strongest believers in the camp. What of
the others who had been sick as long as he? Had they been, perhaps,
men of extreme faith as well? Elend opened his mouth to ask the
question of Demoux. That was when the shouting started.

Hemalurgic
decay was less obvious in Inquisitors that had been created from
Mistborn. Since they already had Allomantic powers, the addition of
other abilities made them awesomely strong.
In most cases,
however, Inquisitors were created from Mistings. It appears that
Seekers, like Marsh, were the favored recruits. For, when a Mistborn
wasn't available, an Inquisitor with enhanced bronze abilities was a
powerful tool for searching out skaa Mistings.





37
SCREAMS
ROSE IN THE DISTANCE. Vin started upright in her cabin. She
hadn't been sleeping, though she'd been close. Another night of
scouting Fadrex City had left her tired.
All fatigue was
forgotten, however, as the sounds of battle clanged from the north.
Finally! she thought, throwing off her blankets and dashing
from the cabin. She wore her standard trousers and shirt, and—as
always—carried several vials of metals. She downed one of these
as she scrambled across the deck of the narrow-boat.
"Lady Vin!"
one of the bargemen called through the daymists. "The camp has
been attacked!"
"And about
time, too," Vin said as she Pushed herself off the boat's
cleats, hurling herself into the air. She shot through the morning
mists, curls and wisps of white making her feel as a bird might
flying through a cloud.
With tin, she soon
found the battle. Several groups of men on horseback had ridden into
the north section of camp, and were apparently trying to make their
way toward the supply barges, which floated in a well-protected bend
in the canal. A group of Elend's Allomancers had set up a perimeter
at one side, Thugs in the front, Coinshots picking off the riders
from behind. The regular soldiers held the middle, fighting well,
since the horsemen were slowed by the camp's barricades and
fortifications.
Elend was
right, Vin thought with pride, descending through the air. If
we hadn't exposed our men to the mists, we'd be in trouble right now.
The king's planning
had saved their supplies and baited out one of Yomen's harrying
forces. The riders had probably expected to run easily through the
camp—catching the soldiers unaware and trapped by mist—then
set fire to the supply barges. Instead, Elend's scouts and patrols
had provided enough warning, and the enemy cavalry was bogged down in
a head-on fight.
Yomen's soldiers
were punching through into the camp on the south side. Though Elend's
soldiers fought well, their enemies were mounted. Vin plunged down
through the sky, flaring pewter and strengthening her body. She
tossed a coin, Pushing on it to slow herself, and hit the dark
ground, throwing up a huge spray of ash. The southern bank of riders
had penetrated as far as the third line of tents. Vin chose to land
right in the middle of them.
No horseshoes,
Vin thought as soldiers began to turn toward her. And spears
—stone-tipped —instead of swords. Yomen
certainly is careful.
It almost felt like
a challenge. Vin smiled, the adrenaline feeling good after so many
days spent waiting. Yomen's captains began to call out, turning their
attack toward Vin. In seconds, they had a force of some thirty riders
galloping straight at her.
Vin stared them
down. Then she jumped. She didn't need steel to get herself high—her
pewter-enhanced muscles were enough for that. She crested the lead
soldier's spear, feeling it pass through the air beneath her. Ash
swirled in the morning mists as Vin's foot took the soldier in the
face, throwing him backward from the saddle. She landed beside his
rolling body, then dropped a coin and Pushed herself to the side, out
of the way of galloping hooves. The unfortunate rider she'd unhorsed
cried out as his friends inadvertently trampled him.
Vin's Push carried
her through the open flaps of a large canvas sleeping tent. She
rolled to her feet, and then—still in motion—Pushed
against the tent's metal stakes, ripping them from the ground.
The walls shook,
and there was a snap of canvas as the tent shot upward into the air,
spread taut as its stakes all went different directions. Ash blew
outward from the burst of air, and soldiers on both sides of the
conflict turned toward Vin. She allowed the tent to fall down in
front of her, then Pushed. The canvas caught the air, puffing out,
and the stakes ripped free from the tent, shooting forward to spear
horses and riders.
Men and beasts
fell. Canvas fluttered to the ground before Vin. She smiled, then
jumped over the discarded tangle as the riders tried to organize
another assault. She didn't give them time. Elend's soldiers in the
area had pulled back, shoring up the center of the defensive line,
leaving Vin free to attack without fear of harming her own men.
She dashed between
the horsemen, their massive mounts hindering them as they tried to
keep track of her. Men and horses spun, and Vin Pulled, tearing tents
out of the ground and using their metal stakes like arrows. Dozens
fell before her.
The sound of
galloping came from behind, and Vin spun to see that one of the enemy
officers had managed to organize another charge. Ten men came
straight at her, some with spears leveled, others drawing bows.
Vin didn't like
killing. But she loved Allomancy—loved the challenge of using
her skills, the strength and thrill of the Pushes and Pulls, the
electric sense of power that came only from a body flared with
pewter. When men such as these gave her an excuse to fight, she
didn't restrain herself.
The arrows didn't
have a chance against her. Pewter gave her speed and balance as she
spun out of the way, Pulling on a metal source behind her. She jumped
into the air as a rippling tent passed beneath her, carried forward
by her Pull a moment before. She landed, then Pushed on several of
its stakes—a couple on each of two tent corners. The tent
folded upon itself, looking a bit like a napkin with someone pulling
tightly on opposite corners.
And this hit the
legs of the horses like a tripwire. Vin burned duralumin, then
Pushed. The horses in front screamed, the improvised weapon
scattering them to the ground. The canvas ripped, and the stakes
pulled free, but the damage was done—those in front tripped
those behind, and men tumbled beside their beasts.
Vin downed another
vial to replenish her steel. Then she Pulled, whipping another tent
toward her. As it grew close, she jumped, then spun and Pushed the
tent toward another group of mounted men behind. The tent's stakes
struck one of the soldiers in the chest, throwing him backward. He
crashed through the other soldiers, causing chaos.
The man hit the
ground, slumping lifeless into the ash. Still tied to him by the
stakes in his chest, the canvas tent fluttered down, covering his
body like a funeral shroud. Vin spun, seeking more enemies. The
riders, however, were beginning to withdraw. She stepped forward,
intending to chase them down, but stopped. Someone was watching
her—she could see his shadow in the mist. She burned bronze.
The figure thumped
with the power of metals. Allomancer. Mistborn. He was far too short
to be Elend, but she couldn't tell much more than that through the
shadow of mist and ash. Vin didn't pause to think. She dropped a coin
and shot herself toward the stranger.
He leaped backward,
Pushing himself into the air as well. Vin followed, quickly leaving
the camp behind, bounding after the Allomancer. He quickly made his
way to the city, and she followed, moving in vast leaps over an ashen
landscape. Her quarry crested the rock formations at the front of the
city, and Vin followed, landing just a few feet from a surprised
guard patrol, then launching herself over crags and windswept rocks
into Fadrex proper.
The other
Allomancer stayed ahead of her. There was no playfulness to his
motions, as there had been with Zane. This man was really trying to
escape. Vin followed, now leaping over rooftops and streets. She
gritted her teeth, frustrated at her inability to catch up. She timed
each jump perfectly, barely pausing as she chose new anchors and
Pushed herself from arc to arc.
Yet, he was good.
He rounded the city, forcing her to push herself to keep up. Fine!
she finally thought, then prepared her duralumin. She'd gotten close
enough to the figure that he was no longer shadowed in mist, and she
could see that he was real and corporeal, not some phantom spirit.
She was increasingly certain that this was the man she'd sensed
watching her when she'd first come into Fadrex. Yomen had a Mistborn.
However, to fight
the man, she'd first need to catch him. She waited for the right
moment, just when he was beginning to crest one of his arcing jumps,
then extinguished her metals and burned duralumin. Then she Pushed.
A crash sounded
behind her as her unnatural Push shattered the door she'd used as an
anchor. She was thrown forward with a terrible burst of speed, like
an arrow released from a bow. She approached her opponent with
awesome speed.
And found nothing.
Vin cursed, turning her tin back on. She couldn't leave it on while
burning duralumin—otherwise, her tin would burn away in a
single flash, leaving her blinded. But, she'd effectively done the
same thing by turning it off. She Pulled herself down from her
duralumin Push to land maladroitly atop a nearby roof. She crouched
as she scanned the misty air.
Where did you
go? she thought, burning bronze, trusting in her innate—yet
still unexplained—ability to pierce copperclouds to reveal her
opponent. No Allomancer could hide from Vin unless he completely
turned off his metals.
Which, apparently
this man had done. Again. This was the second time he'd eluded her.
It bespoke a
disquieting possibility. Vin had tried very hard to keep her ability
to pierce copperclouds a secret, but it had been nearly four years
since her discovery of it. Zane had known about it, and she couldn't
know who else had guessed, based on things she could do. Her secret
could very well be out.
Vin remained on
that rooftop for a few moments, but knew she'd find nothing. A man
clever enough to escape her at the exact moment when her tin was down
would also be clever enough to remain hidden until she was gone. In
fact, it made her wonder why he had let her see him in the first . .
.
Vin stood bolt
upright, then downed a metal vial and Pushed herself off the rooftop,
jumping with a furious anxiety back toward the camp.
She found the
soldiers cleaning up the wreckage and bodies at the camp's perimeter.
Elend was moving among them calling out orders, congratulating the
men, and generally letting himself be seen. Indeed, sight of his
white-clothed form immediately brought Vin a sense of relief.
She landed beside
him. "Elend, were you attacked?"
He glanced at her.
"What? Me? No, I'm fine."
Then the
Allomancer wasn't sent to distract me from an attack on Elend, she
thought, frowning. It had seemed so obvious. It—
Elend pulled her
aside, looking worried. "I'm fine, Vin, but there's
something else—something's happened."
"What?"
Vin asked.
Elend shook his
head. "I think this all was just a distraction—the entire
attack on the camp."
"But, if they
weren't after you," Vin said, "and they weren't after our
supplies, then what was there to distract us from?"
Elend met her eyes.
"The koloss."
"How did we
miss this?" Vin asked, sounding frustrated.
Elend stood with a
troop of soldiers on a plateau, waiting as Vin and Ham inspected the
burned siege equipment. Down below, he could see Fadrex City, and his
own army camped outside it. The mists had retreated a short time ago.
It was disturbing that from this distance he couldn't even make out
the canal—the falling ash had darkened its waters and covered
the landscape to the point that everything just looked black.
At the base of the
plateau's cliffs lay the remnants of their koloss army. Twenty
thousand had become ten thousand in a few brief moments as a
well-laid trap had rained down destruction on the beasts while
Elend's troops were distracted. The daymists had kept his men from
seeing what was going on until it was too late. Elend himself had
felt the deaths, but had misinterpreted them as koloss sensing the
battle.
"Caves in the
back of those cliffs," Ham said, poking at a bit of charred
wood. "Yomen probably had the trebuchets stored in the caves in
anticipation of our arrival, though I'd guess they were originally
being built for an assault on Luthadel. Either way, this plateau was
a perfect staging area for a barrage. I'd say Yomen set them up here
intending to attack our army, but when we camped the koloss just
beneath the plateau . . ."
Elend could still
hear the screams in his head—the koloss, full of bloodlust and
frothing to fight, yet unable to attack their enemies, which were
high atop the plateau. The falling rocks had done a lot of damage.
And then the creatures had slipped away from him. Their frustration
had been too powerful, and for a time, he hadn't been able to keep
them from turning on each other. Most of the deaths had come as the
koloss attacked each other. Roughly one of every two had died as they
had paired off and killed each other.
I lost control
of them, he thought. It had only been for a short while, and it
had only happened because they hadn't been able to get at their
enemies. However, it set a dangerous precedent.
Vin, frustrated,
kicked a large chunk of burned wood, sending it tumbling down the
side of the plateau.
"This was a
very well-planned attack, El," Ham said, speaking in a
soft voice. "Yomen must have seen us sending out extra patrols
in the mornings, and correctly guessed that we were expecting an
attack during those hours. So, he gave us one—then hit us where
we should have been the strongest."
"It cost him a
lot, though," Elend said. "He had to burn his own siege
equipment to keep it away from us, and he has to have lost hundreds
of soldiers—plus their mounts—in the attack on our camp."
"True,"
Ham said. "But would you trade a couple dozen siege weapons and
five hundred men for ten thousand koloss? Plus, Yomen has to be
worried about keeping that cavalry mobile—the Survivor only
knows where he got enough grain to feed those horses as long as he
did. Better for him to strike now and lose them in battle than to
have them starve."
Elend nodded
slowly. This makes things more difficult. With ten thousand fewer
koloss . . . Suddenly, the forces were much more evenly matched.
Elend could maintain his siege, but storming the city would be far
more risky.
He sighed. "We
shouldn't have left the koloss so far outside of the main camp. We'll
have to move them in."
Ham didn't seem to
like that.
"They're not
dangerous," Elend said. "Vin and I can control them."
Mostly.
Ham shrugged. He
moved back through the smoking wreckage, preparing to send
messengers. Elend walked forward, approaching Vin, who stood at the
very edge of the cliff. Being up so high still made him a bit
uncomfortable. Yet, she barely even noticed the sheer drop in front
of her.
"I should have
been able to help you regain control of them," she said quietly,
staring out into the distance. "Yomen distracted me."
"He distracted
us all," Elend said. "I felt the koloss in my head, but
even so, I couldn't figure out what was going on. I'd regained
control of them by the time you got back, but by then, a lot of them
were dead."
"Yomen has a
Mistborn," Vin said.
"You're sure?"
Vin nodded.
One more thing,
he thought. He contained his frustration, however. His men
needed to see him confident. "I'm giving a thousand of the
koloss to you," he said. "We should have split them up
earlier."
"You're
stronger," Vin said.
"Not strong
enough, apparently."
Vin sighed, then
nodded. "Let me go down below." They'd found that proximity
helped with taking control of koloss.
"I'll pull off
a section of a thousand or so, then let go. Be ready to grab them as
soon as I do."
Vin nodded, then
stepped off the side of the plateau.
I should have
realized that I was getting caught up in the excitement of the
fighting, Vin thought as she fell through the air. It seemed so
obvious to her now. And, unfortunately, the results of the attack
left her feeling even more pent-up and anxious than she had before.
She tossed a coin
and landed. Even a drop of several hundred feet didn't bother her
anymore. It was odd to think about. She remembered timidly standing
atop the Luthadel city wall, afraid to use her Allomancy to jump off,
despite Kelsier's coaxing. Now she could step off a cliff and muse
thoughtfully to herself on the way down.
She walked across
the powdery ground. The ash came up to the top of her calves and
would have been difficult to walk in without pewter to give her
strength. The ashfalls were growing increasingly dense.
Human approached
her almost immediately. She couldn't tell if the koloss was simply
reacting to their bond, or if he was actually aware and interested
enough to pick her out. He had a new wound on his arm, a result of
the fighting. He fell into step beside her as she moved up to the
other koloss, his massive form obviously having no trouble with the
deep ash.
As usual, there was
very little emotion to the koloss camp. Just a short time before,
they had been screaming in bloodlust, attacking each other as stones
crashed down from above. Now they simply sat in the ash, gathered in
small groups, ignoring their wounds. They would have had fires going
if there had been wood available. Some few dug, finding handfuls of
dirt to chew on.
"Don't your
people care, Human?" Vin asked.
The massive koloss
looked down at her, ripped face bleeding slightly. "Care?"
"That so many
of you died," Vin said. She could see corpses lying about,
forgotten in the ash save for the ritual flaying that was the koloss
form of burial. Several koloss still worked, moving between bodies,
ripping off the skin.
"We take care
of them," Human said.
"Yes,"
Vin said. "You pull their skin off. Why do you do that, anyway?"
"They are
dead," Human said, as if that were enough of an explanation.
To the side, a
large group of koloss stood up, commanded by Elend's silent orders.
They separated themselves from the main camp, trudging out into the
ash. A moment later, they began to look around, no longer moving as
one.
Vin reacted
quickly. She turned off her metals, burned duralumin, then flared
zinc in a massive Pull, Rioting the koloss emotions. As expected,
they snapped under her control, just as Human was.
Controlling this
many was more difficult, but still well within her abilities. Vin
ordered them to be calm, and to not kill, then let them return to the
camp. From now on, they would remain in the back of her mind, no
longer requiring Allomancy to manipulate. They were easy to ignore
unless their passions grew strong.
Human watched them.
"We are . . . fewer," he finally said.
Vin started. "Yes,"
she said. "You can tell that?"
"I . . ."
Human trailed off, beady little eyes watching his camp. "We
fought. We died. We need more. We have too many swords." He
pointed in the distance, to a large pile of metal. Wedge-shaped
koloss swords that no longer had owners.
You can control
a koloss population through the swords, Elend had once told her.
They fight to get bigger swords as they grow. Extra swords go to
the younger, smaller koloss.
But nobody
knows where those come from.
"You need
koloss to use those swords, Human," Vin said.
Human nodded.
"Well,"
she said. "You'll need to have more children, then."
"Children?"
"More,"
Vin said. "More koloss."
"You need to
give us more," Human said, looking at her.
"Me?"
"You fought,"
he said, pointing at her shirt. There was blood there, not her own.
"Yes, I did,"
Vin said.
"Give us
more."
"I don't
understand," Vin said. "Please, just show me."
"I can't,"
Human said, shaking his head as he spoke in his slow tone. "It's
not right."
"Wait,"
Vin said. "Not right?" It was the first real statement of
values she'd gotten from a koloss.
Human looked at
her, and she could see consternation on his face. So, Vin gave him an
Allomantic nudge. She didn't know exactly what to ask him to do, and
that made her control of him weaker. Yet, she Pushed him to do as he
was thinking, trusting—for some reason—that his mind was
fighting with his instincts.
He screamed.
Vin backed away,
shocked, but Human didn't attack her. He ran into the koloss camp, a
massive blue monster on two legs, kicking up ash. Others backed away
from him—not out of fear, for they wore their characteristic
impassive faces. They simply appeared to have enough sense to stay
out of the way of an enraged koloss of Human's size.
Vin followed
carefully as Human approached one of the dead bodies of a koloss who
still wore his skin. Human didn't rip the skin off, however, but
flung the corpse over his shoulder and took off running toward
Elend's camp.
Uh, oh, Vin
thought, dropping a coin and taking to the air. She bounded after
Human, careful not to outpace him. She considered ordering him back,
but did not. He was acting unusually, true, but that was a good
thing. Koloss generally didn't do anything unusual. They
were predictable to a fault.
She landed at the
camp's guard post and waved the soldiers back. Human continued on,
barreling into the camp, startling soldiers. Vin stayed with him,
keeping the soldiers away.
Human paused in the
middle of camp, a bit of his passion wearing off. Vin nudged him
again. After looking about, Human took off toward the broken section
of camp, where Yomen's soldiers had attacked.
Vin followed,
growing more and more curious. Human hadn't taken out his sword.
Indeed, he didn't seem angry at all, just . . . intense. He arrived
at a section where tents had fallen and men had died. The battle was
still only a few hours old, and soldiers moved about, cleaning up.
Triage tents had been set up just beside the battlefield. Human
headed for those.
Vin rushed ahead,
cutting him off just as he reached the tent with the wounded.
"Human," she said warily. "What are you doing?"
He ignored her,
slamming the dead koloss down on the ground. Now, finally, Human
ripped the skin off the corpse. It came off easily—this was one
of the smaller koloss, whose skin hung in folds, far too large for
its body.
Human pulled the
skin free, causing several of the watching guards to groan in
disgust. Vin watched closely despite the stomach-wrenching sight. She
felt like she was on the verge of understanding something very
important.
Human reached down,
and pulled something out of the koloss corpse.
"Wait,"
Vin said, stepping forward. "What was that?"
Human ignored her.
He pulled out something else, and this time Vin caught a flash of
bloodied metal. She followed his fingers as he moved, and this time
saw the item before he pulled it free and hid it in his palm.
A spike. A small
metal spike driven into the side of the dead koloss. There was a rip
of blue skin beside the spikehead, as if . . .
As if the
spikes were holding the skin in place, Vin thought. Like
nails holding cloth to a wall.
Spikes. Spikes like
. . .
Human retrieved a
fourth spike, then stepped forward into the tent. Surgeons and
soldiers moved back in fear, crying out for Vin to do something as
Human approached the bed of a wounded soldier. Human looked from one
unconscious man to another, then reached for one of them.
Stop! Vin
commanded in her mind.
Human froze in
place. Only then did the complete horror of what was happening occur
to her. "Lord Ruler," she whispered. "You were going
to turn them into koloss, weren't you? That's where you come from.
That's why there are no koloss children."
"I am human,"
the large beast said quietly.

Hemalurgy can
be used to steal Allomantic or Feruchemical powers and give them to
another person. However, a Hemalurgic spike can also be created by
killing a normal person, one who is neither an Allomancer nor a
Feruchemist. In that case, the spike instead steals the very power of
Preservation existing within the soul of the people. (The power that,
in fact, gives all people sentience.)
A Hemalurgic
spike can extract this power, then transfer it to another, granting
them residual abilities similar to those of Allomancy. After all,
Preservation's body—a tiny trace of which is carried by every
human being—is the very same essence that fuels Allomancy.
And so, a
kandra granted the Blessing of Potency is actually acquiring a bit of
innate strength similar to that of burning pewter. The Blessing of
Presence grants mental capacity in a similar way, while the Blessing
of Awareness is the ability to sense with greater acuity and the
rarely used Blessing of Stability grants emotional fortitude.





38
SOMETIMES,
SPOOK FORGOT THE MIST was even there. It had become such a
pale, translucent thing to him. Nearly invisible. Stars in the sky
blazed like a million limelights shining down on him. It was a beauty
only he could see.
He turned, looking
across the burned remains of the building. Skaa workers carefully
sifted through the mess. It was hard for Spook to remember that they
couldn't see well in the night's darkness. He had to keep them packed
closely together, working as much by touch as by sight.
The scent was, of
course, terrible. Yet, burning pewter seemed to help mitigate that.
Perhaps the strength it gave him extended to his ability to avoid
unintentional reactions, such as retching or coughing. During his
youth, he had wondered about the pairing of tin and pewter. Other
Allomantic pairs were opposites—steel Pushed on metals, iron
Pulled on them. Copper hid Allomancers, bronze revealed Allomancers.
Zinc enflamed emotions, brass depressed them. Yet, tin and pewter
didn't seem opposites—one enhanced the body, the other the
senses.
And yet, these were
opposites. Tin made his sense of touch so sharp that each step had
once been uncomfortable. Pewter enhanced his body, making it
resistant to pain—and so as he picked his way across the
blackened ruin, his feet didn't hurt as much. In a similar way, where
light had once blinded him, pewter let him endure far more before
needing his blindfold.
The two were
opposites, yet complements—just like the other pairs of
Allomantic metals. He felt right having the one to go with
the other. How had he survived without pewter? He had been a man with
only one half of an ability. Now he was complete.
And yet, he did
wonder what it would be like to have the other powers too. Kelsier
had given him pewter. Could he, perhaps, bless Spook with iron and
steel as well?
A man directed the
line of working figures. His name was Franson; he was the one who had
asked Spook to rescue his sister. The execution was only a day away.
Soon, the child would be thrown into a burning building of her own,
but Spook was working on ways to stop that. There wasn't much he
could do at the moment. So, in the meantime, Franson and his men dug.
It had been some
time since Spook had gone to spy on the Citizen and his councillors.
He'd shared the information he'd gleaned with Sazed and Breeze, and
they'd seemed appreciative. However, with the increased security
around the Citizen's home, they'd suggested that it was foolhardy to
risk more spying until they'd figured out their plans for the city.
Spook had accepted their guidance, though he felt himself growing
anxious. He missed going to see Beldre, the quiet girl with the
lonely eyes.
He didn't know her.
He couldn't fool himself that he did. Yet, when they'd met and spoken
that once, she hadn't screamed or betrayed him. She'd seemed
intrigued by him. That was a good sign, right?
Fool, he
thought. She's the Citizen's own sister! Talking to her nearly
got you killed. Focus on the task at hand.
Spook watched the
work for a time longer. Finally, Franson—dirty and exhausted in
the starlight—approached him. "My lord," Franson
said, "we've gone over this section four times now. The men in
the basement pit have moved all the debris and ash to the sides, and
have sifted through it twice. Whatever we were going to find, we've
found it."
Spook nodded.
Franson was probably right. Spook removed a small pouch from his
pocket, handing it to Franson. It clinked, and the large skaa man
raised an eyebrow.
"Payment,"
Spook said, "for the other men. They've worked here for three
nights."
"They're
friends, my lord," he said. "They just want to see my
sister rescued."
"Pay them
anyway," Spook said. "And tell them to spend the coins on
food and supplies as soon as they can—before Quellion abolishes
coinage in the city."
"Yes, my
lord," Franson said. Then, he glanced to the side, where a
mostly burned banister still stood upright. This is where the workers
had placed the objects they had located in the wreckage: nine human
skulls. They cast eerie shadows in the starlight. Leering, burned,
and blackened.
"My lord,"
Franson said. "May I ask the point of this?"
"I watched
this building burn down," Spook said. "I was there when
these poor people were herded into the mansion, then locked inside. I
couldn't do anything."
"I'm . . .
sorry, my lord," Franson said.
Spook shook his
head. "It's past now. However, there is something their deaths
can teach us."
"My lord?"
Spook regarded the
skulls. The day Spook had watched this building burn—the first
time he had witnessed one of the Citizen's executions—Durn had
told him something. Spook had wanted information about the Citizen's
weaknesses, something to help him beat the man. Durn had only said
one thing in response to this.
Count the
skulls.
Spook had never had
the chance to investigate that tip. He knew Durn would probably
explain himself if pushed, but they both seemed to understand
something important. Spook needed to see it for himself. He needed to
know what the Citizen was doing.
And now he did.
"Ten people were sent into this building to die, Franson,"
Spook said. "Ten people. Nine skulls."
The man frowned.
"What does that tell us?"
"It tells us
there's a way to get your sister out."
"I'm not
certain what to make of this, Lord Breeze," Sazed said. They sat
at a table in one of Urteau's skaa bars. The alcohol flowed freely,
and skaa workers packed the place, despite the darkness and the
mists.
"What do you
mean?" Breeze asked. They sat alone, though Goradel and three of
his toughs sat wearing street clothing at the next table over.
"This is very
strange to me," Sazed said. "Skaa having their own bars is
odd enough. But, skaa going out at night?"
Breeze shrugged.
"Perhaps their fear of the night was more a product of the Lord
Ruler's influence than the mists. With his troops on the streets
watching for thieves, there were reasons other than mist to stay
inside at night."
Sazed shook his
head. "I have studied these things, Lord Breeze. The skaa fear
of the mists was an ingrained superstitious mind-set—it was a
part of their lives. And, Quellion has broken it down in little over
a year."
"Oh, I think
the wine and beer probably did the breaking," Breeze noted.
"You'd be surprised at what men will go through in order to get
themselves properly intoxicated."
Sazed eyed Breeze's
own cup—the man had taken quite a liking to the skaa bars,
despite the fact that he was forced to wear very mundane clothing. Of
course, the clothing probably wasn't necessary anymore. If the city
had even a halfway decent rumor mill, people would have already
connected Breeze to the visitors who had met with Quellion a few days
before. And, now that Sazed had come to the bar, any suspicions would
have been confirmed. There was no way to hide Sazed's identity. His
nationality was obvious. He was too tall, too bald, and he had the
typical Terris long face with drooping features and earlobes
stretched out by the application of numerous earrings.
The time for
anonymity had passed, though Breeze had used it well. During the few
days when people hadn't known who he was, he'd managed to build both
goodwill and contacts in the local underground. Now, he and Sazed
could sit and enjoy a quiet drink without really drawing much
attention. Breeze would, of course, be Soothing the people to ensure
that—but, even so, Sazed was impressed. For one as fond of high
society as Breeze, the man did a remarkable job of relating to
ordinary skaa workers.
A group of men
laughed at the next table, and Breeze smiled, then stood and made his
way over to join them. Sazed remained where he was, a mug of
untouched wine on the table before him. In his opinion, there was an
obvious reason why the skaa were no longer afraid to go out in the
mists. Their superstitions had been overcome by something stronger:
Kelsier. The one they were now calling the Lord of the Mists.
The Church of the
Survivor had spread much further than Sazed had expected. It wasn't
organized the same way in Urteau as in Luthadel, and the focus seemed
to be different, but the fact remained that men were worshipping
Kelsier. In fact, the differences were part of what made the whole
phenomenon fascinating.
What am I
missing? Sazed thought. What is the connection here?
The mists killed.
Yet, these people went out in the mists. Why weren't the people
terrified of them?
This is not my
problem, Sazed told himself. I need to remain focused. I've
let my studies of the religions in my portfolio lapse. He was
getting close to being finished, and that worried him. So far, every
single religion had proven full of inconsistencies, contradictions,
and logical flaws. He was growing more and more worried that, even
among the hundreds of religions in his metalminds, he would never be
able to find the truth.
A wave from Breeze
distracted him. So, Sazed stood—forcing himself not to show the
despair he felt—and moved over to the table. The men there made
room.
"Thank you,"
Sazed said, sitting.
"You forgot
your cup, friend Terrisman," one of the men pointed out.
"I apologize,"
Sazed said. "I have never been one fond of intoxicants. Please,
do not take offense. Your thoughtful gift was nevertheless
appreciated."
"Does he
always talk like that?" one of the men asked, looking at Breeze.
"You've never
known a Terrismen, have you?" asked another.
Sazed flushed, to
which Breeze chuckled, laying a hand on Sazed's shoulder. "All
right, gentlemen. I've brought you the Terrisman, as requested. Go
ahead, ask your questions."
There were six
local men at the table—all mine workers, from what Sazed could
tell. One of the men leaned forward, hands clasped in front of him,
knuckles scarred by rock. "Breeze here says a lot of things,"
the man said in a low voice. "But people like him always make
promises. Quellion said a lot of the same things a year ago, when he
was taking control after Straff Venture left."
"Yes,"
Sazed. "I can understand your skepticism."
"But,"
the man said, raising a hand. "Terrismen don't lie. They're good
people. Everyone knows that—lords, skaa, thieves, and
obligators."
"So, we wanted
to talk to you," another of the men said. "Maybe you're
different; maybe you'll lie to us. But, better to hear it from a
Terrisman than a Soother."
Breeze blinked,
revealing just a faint hint of surprise. Apparently, he hadn't
realized they'd been aware of his abilities.
"Ask your
questions," Sazed said.
"Why did you
come to this city?" one of the men asked.
"To take
control of it," Sazed said.
"Why do you
care?" another asked. "Why does Venture's son even want
Urteau?"
"Two reasons,"
Sazed said. "First, because of the resources it offers. I cannot
go into details, but suffice it to say that your city is very
desirable for economic reasons. The second reason, however, is
equally important. Lord Elend Venture is one of the best men I have
ever known. He believes he can do better for this people than the
current government."
"That wouldn't
be hard," one of the men grumbled.
Another man shook
his head. "What? You want to give the city back to the Ventures?
One year, and you've forgotten the things that Straff used to do in
this city?"
"Elend Venture
is not his father," Sazed said. "He is a man worthy of
being followed."
"And the
Terris people?" one of the skaa asked. "Do they follow
him?"
"In a way,"
Sazed said. "Once, my people tried to rule themselves, as your
people now do. However, they realized the advantages of an alliance.
My people have moved to the Central Dominance, and they accept the
protection of Elend Venture." Of course, Sazed thought,
they'd rather follow me. If I would be their king.
The table fell
silent.
"I don't
know," one of the men said. "What business do we have even
talking about this? I mean, Quellion is in charge, and these
strangers don't have an army to take his throne away from him. What's
the point?"
"The Lord
Ruler fell to us when we had no army," Breeze pointed out, "and
Quellion himself seized the government from noble rule. Change can
occur."
"We're not
trying to form an army or rebellion," Sazed quickly added. "We
just want you to start . . . thinking. Talking with your friends. You
are obviously influential men. Perhaps if Quellion hears of
discontent among his people, he will begin to change his ways."
"Maybe,"
one of the men said.
"We don't need
these outsiders," the other man repeated. "The Survivor of
the Flames has come to deal with Quellion."
Sazed blinked.
Survivor of the Flames? He caught a sly smile on Breeze's
lips—the Soother had apparently heard the term before, and now
he appeared to be watching Sazed for a reaction.
"The Survivor
doesn't enter into this," one of the men said. "I can't
believe we're even thinking of rebellion. Most of the world
is in chaos, if you hear the reports! Shouldn't we just be happy with
what we've got?"
The Survivor?
Sazed thought. Kelsier? But, they seem to have given him a
new title. Survivor of the Flames?
"You're
starting to twitch, Sazed," Breeze whispered. "You might as
well just ask. No harm in asking, right?"
No harm in asking.
"The . . .
Survivor of the Flames?" Sazed asked. "Why do you call
Kelsier that?"
"Not Kelsier,"
one of the men said. "The other Survivor. The new one."
"The Survivor
of Hathsin came to overthrow the Lord Ruler," one of the men
said. "So, can't we assume the Survivor of the Flames has come
to overthrow Quellion? Maybe we should listen to these men."
"If the
Survivor is here to overthrow Quellion," another man said, "then
he won't need the help of these types. They just want the city for
themselves."
"Excuse me,"
Sazed said. "But . . . might we meet this new Survivor?"
The group of men
shared looks.
"Please,"
Sazed said. "I was a friend to the Survivor of Hathsin. I should
very much like to meet a man whom you have deemed worthy of Kelsier's
stature."
"Tomorrow,"
one of the men said. "Quellion tries to keep the dates quiet,
but they get out. There will be executions near Marketpit. Be there."

Even now, I can
barely grasp the scope of all this. The events surrounding the end of
the world seem even larger than the Final Empire and the people
within it. I sense shards of something from long ago, a fractured
presence, something spanning the void.
I have delved
and searched, and have only been able to come up with a single name:
Adonasium. Who, or what, it was, I do not yet know.





39
TENSOON SAT
ON HIS HAUNCHES. Horrified.
Ash rained down
like shards of a broken sky, floating, making the very air look
pocked and sickly. Even where he sat, atop a windswept hill, there
was a layer of ash smothering the plant life. Some trees had branches
broken by the weight of repeated ash pileups.
How could they
not see? he thought. How can they hide in their hole of a
Homeland, content to let the land above die?
Yet, TenSoon had
lived for hundreds of years, and a part of him understood the tired
complacency of the First and Second Generations. At times he'd felt
the same thing himself. A desire to simply wait. To spend years idly,
content in the Homeland. He'd seen the outside world—seen more
of it than any human or koloss would ever know. What need had he of
experiencing more?
The Seconds had
seen him as more orthodox and obedient than his brethren, all because
he had continually wanted to leave the Homeland and serve Contracts.
The Second Generation had always misunderstood him. TenSoon hadn't
served out of a desire to be obedient. He'd done it out of fear: fear
that he'd become content and apathetic like the Seconds and begin to
think that the outside world didn't matter to the kandra people.
He shook his head,
then rose to all fours and loped off down the side of the hill,
scattering ash into the air with each bound. As frightening as things
had gotten, he was happy for one thing. The wolfhound's body felt
good on him. There was such a power in it—a capacity for
movement—that no human form could match. It was almost as if
this were the form he always should have worn. What better
body for a kandra with an incurable wanderlust? A kandra who had left
his Homeland behind more often than any other, serving under the
hated hands of human masters, all because of his fear of complacency?
He made his way
through the thin forest cover, over hills, hoping that the blanket of
ash wouldn't make it too difficult for him to navigate. The falling
ash did affect the kandra people—it affected them greatly. They
had legends about this exact event. What good was the First Contract,
what good was the waiting, the protection of the Trust? To most of
the kandra, apparently, these things had become a point unto
themselves.
Yet, these things
meant something. They had an origin. TenSoon hadn't been
alive back then. However, he had known the First Generation and been
raised by the Second. He grew up during days when the First
Contract—the Trust, the Resolution—had been more than
just words. The First Contract was a set of instructions. Actions to
take when the world began to fall. Not just ceremony, and not just
metaphor. He knew that its contents frightened some of the kandra.
For them, it was better that the First Contract be a philosophical,
abstract thing—for if it were still concrete, still relevant,
it would require great sacrifices of them.
TenSoon stopped
running; he was up to his wolfhound knees in deep black ash. The
location looked vaguely familiar. He turned south, moving through a
small rocky hollow—the stones now just dark lumps—looking
for a place he had been over a year before. A place he'd visited
after he had turned against Zane, his master, and left Luthadel to
return to the Homeland.
He scrambled up a
few rocks, then rounded the side of a stone outcrop, knocking lumps
of ash off with his passing. They broke apart as they fell, throwing
more flakes into the air.
And there it was.
The hollow in rock, the place where he had stopped a year before. He
remembered it, despite how the ash had transformed the landscape. The
Blessing of Presence, serving him again. How would he get along
without it?
I would not be
sentient without it, he thought, smiling grimly. It was the
bestowing of a Blessing on a mistwraith that brought the creature to
wakefulness and true life. Each kandra got one of the four: Presence,
Potency, Stability, or Awareness. It didn't matter which one a kandra
gained; any of the four would give him or her sentience, changing the
mistwraith into a fully conscious kandra.
In addition to
sentience, each Blessing gave something else. A power. But there were
stories of kandra who had gained more than one by taking them from
others.
TenSoon stuck a paw
into the depression, digging out the ash, working to uncover the
things he had hidden a year before. He found them quickly, rolling
one—then the other—out onto the rock shelf in front of
him. Two small, polished iron spikes. It took two spikes to form a
single Blessing. TenSoon didn't know why this was. It was simply the
way of things.
TenSoon lay down,
commanding the skin of his shoulder to part, and absorbed the spikes
into his body. He moved them through muscles and ligaments—dissolving
several organs, then re-forming them with the spikes piercing them.
Immediately, he
felt power wash through him. His body became stronger. It was more
than the simple adding of muscles—he could do that by
re-forming his body. No, this gave each muscle an extra innate
strength, making them work much better, much more powerfully, than
they would have otherwise.
The Blessing of
Potency. He'd stolen the two spikes from OreSeur's body. Without this
Blessing, TenSoon would never have been able to follow Vin as he had
during their year together. It more than doubled the power and
endurance of each muscle. He couldn't regulate or change the level of
that added strength—this was not Feruchemy or Allomancy, but
something different. Hemalurgy.
A person had died
to create each spike. TenSoon tried not to think about that too much;
just as he tried not to think about how he only had this Blessing
because he had killed one of his own generation. The Lord Ruler had
provided the spikes each century, giving the number requested, so
that the kandra could craft a new generation.
He now had four
spikes, two Blessings, and was one of the most powerful kandra alive.
His muscles strengthened, TenSoon jumped confidently from the top of
the rock formation, falling some twenty feet to land safely on the
ash-covered ground below. He took off, running far more quickly now.
The Blessing of Potency resembled the power of an Allomancer burning
pewter, but it was not the same. It would not keep TenSoon moving
indefinitely, nor could he flare it for an extra burst of power. On
the other hand, it required no metals to fuel it.
He made his path
eastward. The First Contract was very explicit. When Ruin returned,
the kandra were to seek out the Father to serve him. Unfortunately,
the Father was dead. The First Contract didn't take that possibility
into consideration. So—unable to go to the Father—TenSoon
did the next best thing. He went looking for Vin.

Originally, we
assumed that a koloss was a combination of two people into one. That
was wrong. Koloss are not the melding of two people, but five, as
evidenced by the four spikes needed to make them. Not five bodies, of
course, but five souls.
Each pair of
spikes grants what the kandra would call the Blessing of Potency.
However, each spike also distorts the koloss body a little more,
making it increasingly inhuman. Such is the cost of Hemalurgy.





40
"NOBODY
KNOWS PRECISELY how Inquisitors are made," Elend said
from the front of the tent, addressing a small group, which included
Ham, Cett, the scribe Noorden, and the mostly recovered Demoux. Vin
sat at the back, still trying to sort through what she had
discovered. Human . . . all koloss . . . they had once been people.
"There are
lots of theories about it, however," Elend said. "Once the
Lord Ruler fell, Sazed and I did some research, and discovered some
interesting facts from the obligators we interviewed. For instance,
Inquisitors are made from ordinary men—men who remember who
they were, but gain new Allomantic abilities."
"Our
experience with Marsh proves that as well," Ham said. "He
remembered who he was, even after he had all of those spikes driven
through his body. And he gained the powers of a Mistborn when he
became an Inquisitor."
"Excuse me,"
Cett said, "but will someone please explain what the hell this
has to do with our siege of the city? There aren't any Inquisitors
here."
Elend folded his
arms. "This is important, Cett, because we're at war with more
than just Yomen. Something we don't understand, something far greater
than those soldiers inside of Fadrex."
Cett snorted. "You
still believe in this talk of doom and gods and the like?"
"Noorden,"
Elend said, looking at the scribe. "Please tell Lord Cett what
you told me earlier today."
The former
obligator nodded. "Well, my lord, it's like this. Those numbers
relating to the percentage of people who fall ill to the mists,
they're just too regular to be natural. Nature works in
organized chaos—randomness on the small scale, with trends on
the large scale. I cannot believe that anything natural could have
produced such precise results."
"What do you
mean?" Cett asked.
"Well, my
lord," Noorden said. "Imagine that you hear a tapping sound
somewhere outside your tent. If it repeats occasionally, with no
exact set pattern, then it might be the wind blowing a loose flap
against a pole. However, if it repeats with exact regularity, you
know that it must be a person, beating against a pole. You'd be able
to make the distinction immediately, because you've learned that
nature can be repetitive in a case like that, but not exact.
These numbers are the same, my lord. They're just too organized, too
repetitive, to be natural. They had to have been crafted by
somebody."
"You're saying
that a person made those soldiers sick?" Cett asked.
"A person? . .
. No, not a person, I'd guess," Noorden said. "But
something intelligent must have done it. That's the only
conclusion I can draw. Something with an agenda, something that cares
to be precise."
The room fell
silent.
"And, this
relates to Inquisitors somehow, my lord?" Demoux asked
carefully.
"It does,"
Elend said. "At least, it does if you think as I do—which,
I'll admit, not many people do."
"For better or
for worse . . ." Ham said, smiling.
"Noorden, what
do you know of how Inquisitors are made?" Elend asked.
The scribe grew
uncomfortable. "I was in the Canton of Orthodoxy, as you may
know, not the Canton of Inquisition."
"Surely there
were rumors," Elend asked.
"Well, of
course," Noorden said. "More than rumors, actually. The
higher obligators were always trying to discover how the
Inquisitors got their power. There was a rivalry between the Cantons,
you see, and . . . well, I supposed you don't care about that.
Regardless, we did have rumors."
"And?"
Elend asked.
"They said . .
." Noorden began. "They said that an Inquisitor was a
fusion of many different people. In order to make an Inquisitor, the
Canton of Inquisition had to get a whole group of Allomancers, then
combine their powers into one."
Again, silence in
the room. Vin pulled her legs up, wrapping her arms around her knees.
She didn't like talking about Inquisitors.
"Lord Ruler!"
Ham swore quietly. "That's it! That's why the
Inquisitors were so keen on hunting down skaa Mistings! Don't you
see! It wasn't just because the Lord Ruler ordered half-breeds to be
killed—it was so that the Inquisitors could perpetuate
themselves! They needed Allomancers to kill so that they could make
new Inquisitors!"
Elend nodded from
his place at the front of the room. "Somehow, those spikes in
the Inquisitors' bodies transfer Allomantic ability. You kill eight
Mistings, and you give all their powers to one other man, such as
Marsh. Sazed once told me that Marsh was always hesitant to speak of
the day he was made an Inquisitor, but he did say that it was . . .
'messy.' "
Ham nodded. "And
when Kelsier and Vin found his room the day he was taken and made an
Inquisitor, they found a corpse in there. One they initially assumed
was Marsh!"
"Later, Marsh
said that more than one person had been killed there," Vin said
quietly. "There just hadn't been enough . . . left of them to
tell."
"Again,"
Cett said, "does this all have a point?"
"Well, it
seems to be doing a good job of annoying you," Ham said lightly.
"Do we need any other point?"
Elend gave them
both hard looks. "The point is, Cett, that Vin discovered
something earlier this week."
The group turned
toward her.
"Koloss,"
Vin said. "They're made from humans."
"What?"
Cett asked, frowning. "That's absurd."
"No," Vin
said, shaking her head. "I'm sure of it. I've checked living
koloss. Hidden in those folds and rips of skin on their bodies, they
are pierced by spikes. Smaller than the Inquisitor spikes, and made
from different metals, but all of the koloss have them."
"Nobody has
been able to figure out where new koloss come from," Elend said.
"The Lord Ruler guarded the secret, and it's become one of the
great mysteries of our time. Koloss seem to kill each other with
regularity when someone isn't actively controlling them. Yet, there
always seem to be more of the creatures. How?"
"Because they
are constantly replenishing their numbers," Ham said, nodding
slowly. "From the villages they pillage."
"Did you ever
wonder," Elend said, "back during the siege of Luthadel,
why Jastes's koloss army attacked a random village before coming for
us? The creatures needed to replenish their numbers."
"They always
walk about," Vin said, "wearing clothing, talking about
being human. Yet, they can't quite remember what it was like. Their
minds have been broken."
Elend nodded. "The
other day, Vin finally got one of them to show her how to make new
koloss. From what he did, and from what he's said since, we believe
that he was going to try to combine two men into one. That
would make a creature with the strength of two men, but the mind of
neither."
"A third art,"
Ham said, looking up. "A third way to use the metals. There is
Allomancy, which draws power from the metals themselves. There is
Feruchemy, which uses metals to draw power from your own body, and
there is . . ."
"Marsh called
it Hemalurgy," Vin said quietly.
"Hemalurgy . .
." Ham said. "Which uses the metals to draw power from
someone else's body."
"Great,"
Cett said. "Point?"
"The Lord
Ruler created servants to help him," Elend said. "Using
this art . . . this Hemalurgy . . . he made soldiers, which we call
koloss. He made spies, which we call kandra. And he made priests,
which we call Inquisitors. He built them all with weaknesses, so that
he could control them."
"I first
learned how to take control of the koloss because of TenSoon,"
Vin said. "He inadvertently showed me the secret. He mentioned
that the kandra and koloss were cousins, and I realized I could
control one just as I had the other."
"I . . . still
don't see where you're heading with this," Demoux said, glancing
from Vin to Elend.
"The
Inquisitors must have the same weakness, Demoux," Elend said.
"This Hemalurgy leaves the mind . . . wounded. It allows an
Allomancer to creep in and take control. The nobility always wondered
what made the Inquisitors so fanatically devoted to the Lord Ruler.
They weren't like regular obligators—they were far more
obedient. Zealous to a fault."
"It happened
to Marsh," Vin whispered. "The first time I met him after
he'd been made an Inquisitor, he seemed different. But, he only grew
even odder during the year following the Collapse. Finally, he turned
on Sazed, tried to kill him."
"What we're
trying to suggest," Elend said, "is that something is
controlling the Inquisitors and the koloss. Something is exploiting
the weakness the Lord Ruler built into the creatures and is using
them as its pawns. The troubles we've been suffering, the chaos
following the Collapse—it's not simply chaos. No more
than the patterns of people who fall sick to the mists are chaotic. I
know it seems obvious, but the important thing here is that we now
know the method. We understand why they can be controlled and how
they're being controlled."
Elend continued to
pace, his feet marking the dirty tent floor. "The more I think
about Vin's discovery, the more I come to believe that this is all
connected. The koloss, the kandra, and the Inquisitors are not three
separate oddities, but part of a single cohesive phenomenon. Now, on
the surface, knowledge of this third art . . . this Hemalurgy . . .
doesn't seem like much. We don't intend to use it to make more
koloss, so what good is the knowledge?"
Cett nodded, as if
Elend had spoken the man's own thoughts. Elend, however, had drifted
off a bit, staring out the open tent flaps, losing himself in
thought. It was something he'd once done frequently, back when he
spent more time on scholarship. He wasn't addressing Cett's
questions. He was speaking his own concerns, following his own
logical path.
"This war
we're fighting," Elend continued, "it isn't just about
soldiers. It isn't just about koloss, or about taking Fadrex City.
It's about the sequence of events we inadvertently started the moment
we struck down the Lord Ruler. Hemalurgy—the origins of the
koloss—is part of a pattern. The percentages that fall sick
from the mists are also part of the pattern. The less we see chaos,
and the more we see the pattern, the better we're going to
be at understanding just what we fight—and just how to defeat
it."
Elend turned toward
the group. "Noorden, I want you to change the focus of your
research. Up until now, we've assumed that the movements of the
koloss were random. I'm no longer convinced that is true. Research
our old scout reports. Draw up lists and plot movements. Pay
particular attention to bodies of koloss that we specifically know
weren't under the control of an Inquisitor. I want to see if
we can discover why they went where they did."
"Yes, my
lord," Noorden said.
"The rest of
you stay vigilant," Elend said. "I don't want another
mistake like last week's. We can't afford to lose any more troops,
even koloss."
They nodded, and
Elend's posture indicated the end of the meeting. Cett was carried
away to his tent, Noorden bustled off to begin this new research, and
Ham went in search of something to eat. Demoux, however, stayed. Vin
stood and trailed forward, stepping up to Elend's side and taking his
arm as he turned to address Demoux.
"My lord . .
." Demoux said, looking a bit embarrassed. "I assume
General Hammond has spoken to you?"
What's this?
Vin thought, perking up.
"Yes, Demoux,"
Elend said with a sigh. "But I really don't think it's something
to worry about."
"What?"
Vin asked.
"There is a
certain level of . . . ostracism happening in the camp, my lady,"
Demoux said. "Those of us who fell sick for two weeks, rather
than a few days, are being regarded with a measure of suspicion."
"Suspicion
that you no longer agree with, right, Demoux?" Elend punctuated
this remark with a very kingly stern look.
Demoux nodded. "I
trust your interpretation, my lord. It's just that . . . well, it is
difficult to lead men who distrust you. And, it's much harder for the
others like me. They've taken to eating together, staying away from
the others during their free time. It's reinforcing the division."
"What do you
think?" Elend asked. "Should we try to force
reintegration?"
"That depends,
my lord," Demoux said.
"On?"
"On several
factors," Demoux said. "If you're planning to attack soon,
then reintegrating would be a bad idea—I don't want men
fighting alongside those they don't trust. However, if we're going to
continue the siege for some time, then forcing them back together
might make sense. The larger segment of the army would have time to
learn to trust the mistfallen again."
Mistfallen, Vin
thought. Interesting name.
Elend looked down
at her, and she knew what he was thinking. The ball at the Canton of
Resource was only a few days away. If Elend's plan went well, then
perhaps they wouldn't have to attack Fadrex.
Vin didn't have
great hopes for that option. Plus, without resupply from Luthadel,
they couldn't count on much anymore. They could continue the siege as
planned for months, or they might end up having to attack within a
few weeks.
"Organize a
new company," Elend said, turning to Demoux. "Fill it with
these mistfallen. We'll worry about dealing with superstition after
we hold Fadrex."
"Yes, my
lord," Demoux said. "I think that . . ."
They continued
talking, but Vin stopped paying attention as she heard voices
approaching the command tent. It was probably nothing. Even so, she
moved around so that she was between the approaching people and
Elend, then checked her metal reserves. Within moments, she could
determine who was talking. One was Ham. She relaxed as the tent flap
opened, revealing Ham in his standard vest and trousers, leading a
wearied red-haired soldier. The exhausted man had ash-stained
clothing and wore the leathers of a scout.
"Conrad?"
Demoux asked with surprise.
"You know this
man?" Elend asked.
"Yes, my
lord," Demoux said. "He's one of the lieutenants I left
back in Luthadel with King Penrod."
Conrad saluted,
though he looked rather the worse for the wear. "My lord,"
the man said. "I bring news from the capital."
"Finally!"
Elend said. "What word from Penrod? Where are those supply
barges I sent for?"
"Supply
barges, my lord?" Conrad asked. "My lord, King Penrod sent
me to ask you for resupply. There are riots in the city, and
some of the food stores have been pillaged. King Penrod sent me to
ask you for a contingent of troops to help him restore order."
"Troops?"
Elend asked. "What of the garrison I left with him? He should
have plenty of men!"
"They're not
enough, my lord," Conrad said. "I don't know why. I can
only relay the message I was sent to deliver."
Elend cursed,
slamming his fist against the command tent's table. "Can Penrod
not do the one thing I asked of him? All he needed to do was
hold lands we already have secure!"
The soldier jumped
at the outburst, and Vin watched with concern. Elend, however,
managed to keep his temper under control. He took a deep breath,
waving to the soldier. "Rest yourself, Lieutenant Conrad, and
get some food. I will want to speak with you further about this
later."
Vin found Elend
later that night, standing on the perimeter of the camp, looking up
at the Fadrex watch fires on the cliffs above. She laid a hand on his
shoulder, and the fact that he didn't jump indicated that he'd heard
her coming. It was still a little strange to her that Elend, who had
always seemed slightly oblivious of the world around him, was now a
capable Mistborn, with tin to enhance his ears that let him hear even
the softest footsteps approaching.
"You talked to
the messenger?" she asked as he put his arm around her, still
looking up at the night sky. Ash fell around them. A couple of
Elend's soldier Tineyes passed on patrol, carrying no lights,
silently walking the perimeter of the camp. Vin herself had just
gotten back from a similar patrol, though hers had been around the
perimeter of Fadrex. She did a couple of rounds every night, watching
the city for unusual activity.
"Yes,"
Elend said. "Once he'd had some rest, I spoke to him in depth."
"Bad news?"
"Much of what
he said before. Penrod apparently never got my orders to send food
and troops. Conrad was one of four messengers Penrod sent to us. We
don't know what happened to the other three. Conrad himself was
chased by a group of koloss, and he only got away by baiting them
with his horse, sending it one direction and hiding as they chased it
down and butchered it. He slipped away while they were feasting."
"Brave man,"
Vin said.
"Lucky as
well," Elend said. "Either way, it seems unlikely that
Penrod will be able to send us support. There are food stores in
Luthadel, but if the news of riots is true, Penrod won't be able to
spare the soldiers it would take to guard supplies on their way to
us."
"So . . .
where does that leave us?" Vin asked.
Elend looked at
her, and she was surprised to see determination in his eyes, not
frustration. "With knowledge."
"What?"
"Our enemy has
exposed himself, Vin. Attacking our messengers directly with hidden
pockets of koloss? Trying to undermine our supply base in Luthadel?"
Elend shook his head. "Our enemy wants this to look
random, but I see the pattern. It's too focused, too intelligent, to
be happenstance. He's trying to make us pull away from Fadrex."
Vin felt a chill.
Elend made to say more, but she reached up and laid a hand on his
lips, quieting him. He seemed confused, but then apparently
understood, for he nodded. Whatever we say, Ruin can hear,
Vin thought. We can't give away what we know.
Still, something
passed between them. A knowledge that they had to stay at Fadrex,
that they had to find out what was in that storage cavern.
For their enemy was working hard to keep them from doing so. Was
Ruin, indeed, behind the chaos in Luthadel? A ploy to draw Elend and
his forces back to restore order, thereby abandoning Fadrex?
It was only
speculation, but it was all they had. Vin nodded to Elend, indicating
that she agreed with his determination to stay. Still, she worried.
Luthadel was to have been their rock in all of this—their
secure position. If it was falling apart, what did they have?
More and more, she
was beginning to understand that there would be no falling back. No
retreat to develop alternative plans. The world was collapsing around
them, and Elend had committed himself to Fadrex.
If they failed
here, there would be nowhere else to go.
Eventually, Elend
squeezed her shoulder, then walked off into the mists to check on
some of the guard posts. Vin remained alone, staring up at those
watch fires, feeling a worrisome sense of foreboding. Her thoughts
from before, in the fourth storage cavern, returned to her. Fighting
wars, besieging cities, playing at politics—it wasn't enough.
These things wouldn't save them if the very land itself died.
But, what else
could they do? The only option they had was to take Fadrex and hope
the Lord Ruler had left them some clue to help. She still felt an
inexplicable desire to find the atium. Why was she so certain it
would help?
She closed her
eyes, not wanting to face the mists, which—as always—pulled
away from her, leaving a half-inch or so of empty air around her.
She'd drawn upon them once, back when she'd fought the Lord Ruler.
Why had she been able to fuel her Allomancy with their power that one
time?
She reached out to
them, trying again, as she had so many times. She called to them,
pleaded with them in her mind, tried to access their power. And, she
felt as if she should be able to. There was a strength to
the mists. Trapped within them. But it wouldn't yield to her. It was
as if something kept them back, some blockage perhaps? Or, maybe, a
simple whim on their part.
"Why?"
she whispered, eyes still closed. "Why help me that once, but
never again? Am I mad, or did you really give me power when I
demanded it?"
The night gave her
no answers. Finally, she sighed and turned away, seeking refuge
inside of the tent.

Hemalurgic
spikes change people physically, depending on which powers are
granted, where the spike is placed, and how many spikes someone has.
Inquisitors, for instance, are changed drastically from the humans
they used to be. Their hearts are in different places from those of
humans, and their brains rearrange to accommodate the lengths of
metal jabbed through their eyes. Koloss are changed in even more
drastic ways.
One might think
that kandra are changed most of all. However, one must remember that
new kandra are made from mistwraiths, and not humans. The spikes worn
by the kandra cause only a small transformation in their
hosts—leaving their bodies mostly like that of a mistwraith,
but allowing their minds to begin working. Ironically, while the
spikes dehumanize the koloss, they give a measure of humanity to the
kandra.





41
"DON'T
YOU SEE, BREEZE?" Sazed said eagerly. "This is an
example of what we call ostention—a legend being emulated in
real life. The people believed in the Survivor of Hathsin, and so
they have made for themselves another survivor to help them
in their time of need."
Breeze raised an
eyebrow. They stood near the back of a crowd gathering in the market
district, waiting for the Citizen arrive.
"It is
fascinating," Sazed said. "This is an evolution of the
Survivor legend that I never anticipated. I knew that they might
deify him—in fact, that was almost inevitable. However, since
Kelsier was once an 'ordinary' person, those who worship him can
imagine other people achieving the same status."
Breeze nodded
distractedly. Allrianne stood beside him, looking quite petulant that
she'd been required to wear drab skaa clothing.
Sazed ignored their
lack of excitement. "I wonder what the future of this will be.
Perhaps there will be a succession of Survivors for this
people. This could be the foundation of a religion with true lasting
potential, since it could reinvent itself to suit the needs of the
populace. Of course, new Survivors mean new leaders—each one
with different opinions. Rather than a line of priests who promote
orthodoxy, each new Survivor would seek to establish himself as
distinct from those he succeeded. It could make for numerous factions
and divisions in the body of worshippers."
"Sazed,"
Breeze said. "What ever happened to not collecting religions?"
Sazed paused. "I'm
not really collecting this religion. I'm just theorizing about its
potential."
Breeze raised an
eyebrow.
"Besides,"
Sazed said. "It might have to do with our current mission. If
this new Survivor is indeed a real person, he may be able to help us
overthrow Quellion."
"Or,"
Allrianne noted, "he might present a challenge to us for
leadership of the city once Quellion does fall."
"True,"
Sazed admitted. "Either way, I do not see why you are
complaining, Breeze. Did you not want me to become
interested in religions again?"
"That was
before I realized you'd spend the entire evening, then the next
morning, chattering about it," Breeze said. "Where is
Quellion, anyway? If I miss lunch because of his executions, I'll be
rather annoyed."
Executions. In his
excitement, Sazed had nearly forgotten just what it was they had come
to see. His eagerness deflated, and he remembered why Breeze was
acting so solemnly. The man spoke lightly, but the concern in his
eyes indicated that he was disturbed by the thought of the Citizen
burning innocent people to death.
"There,"
Allrianne said, pointing toward the other side of the market.
Something was making a stir: the Citizen, wearing a bright blue
costume. It was a new "approved" color—one only he
was allowed to wear. His councillors surrounded him in red.
"Finally,"
Breeze said, following the crowd as they bunched up around the
Citizen.
Sazed followed, his
steps growing reluctant. Now that he thought about it, he was tempted
to use his troops to try to stop what was about to occur. Of course,
he knew that would be foolish. Playing his hand now to save a few
would ruin their chances of saving the entire city. With a sigh, he
followed Breeze and Allrianne, moving with the crowd. He also
suspected that watching the murders would remind him of the pressing
nature of his duties in Urteau. Theological studies would wait for
another time.
"You're going
to have to kill them," Kelsier said.
Spook crouched
quietly atop a building in the wealthier section of Urteau. Below,
the Citizen's procession was approaching; Spook watched it through
cloth-wrapped eyes. It had taken many coins—nearly the last of
what he'd brought with him from Luthadel—to bribe out the
location of the executions sufficiently in advance so that he could
get into position.
He could see the
sorry individuals that Quellion had decided to murder. Many of them
were like Franson's sister—people who had been discovered to
have noble parentage. Several others, however, were only spouses of
those with noble blood. Spook also knew of one man in this group who
had spoken out too loudly against Quellion. The man's connection to
the nobility was tenuous. He had once been a craftsman catering
specifically to a noble clientele.
"I know you
don't want to do it," Kelsier said. "But you can't lose
your nerve now."
Spook felt
powerful—pewter lent him an air of invincibility that he'd
never before imagined. He had slept barely a few hours in the last
six days, but he didn't feel tired. He had a sense of balance that
any cat would have envied, and he had strength his muscles shouldn't
have been able to produce.
And yet, power
wasn't everything. His palms were sweating beneath his cloak, and he
felt beads of perspiration creeping down his brow. He was no
Mistborn. He wasn't Kelsier or Vin. He was just Spook. What was he
thinking?
"I can't do
it," he whispered.
"You can,"
Kelsier said. "You've practiced with the cane—I've
watched. Plus, you stood against those soldiers in the market. They
nearly killed you, but you were fighting two Thugs. You did very
well, considering."
"I . . ."
"You need to
save those people, Spook. Ask yourself: What would I do if I
were there?"
"I'm not you."
"Not yet,"
Kelsier whispered.
Not yet.
Below, Quellion
preached against the people about to be executed. Spook could see
Beldre, the Citizen's sister, at his side. Spook leaned forward. Was
that really a look of sympathy, even pain, in her eyes as she watched
the unfortunate prisoners herded toward the building? Or, was that
just what Spook wanted to see in her? He followed her gaze, watching
the prisoners. One of them was a child, holding fearfully to a woman
as the group was prodded into the building that would become their
pyre.
Kelsier's
right, Spook thought. I can't let this happen. I may not
succeed, but at least I have to try. His hands continued to
shake as he moved through the hatch atop his building and dashed down
the steps, cloak whipping behind him. He rounded a corner, heading
for the wine cellar.
Noblemen were
strange creatures. During the days of the Lord Ruler, they had often
feared for their lives as much as skaa thieves did, for court
intrigue often led to imprisonment or assassination. Spook should
have realized what he was missing from the beginning. No thieving
crew would build a lair without a bolt-hole for emergency escapes.
Why would the
nobility be any different?
He leaped, cloak
flapping as he dropped the last few steps. He hit the dusty floor,
and his enhanced ears heard Quellion begin to rant up above. The skaa
crowds were murmuring. The flames had started. There, in the darkened
basement of the building, Spook found a section of the wall already
open, a secret passageway leading from the building next door. A
group of soldiers stood in the passageway.
"Quickly,"
Spook heard one of them say, "before the fire gets here."
"Please!"
another voice cried, her words echoing through the passageway. "At
least take the child!"
People grunted. The
soldiers moved on the opposite side of the passage from Spook,
keeping the people in the other basement from escaping. They had been
sent by Quellion to save one of the prisoners. On the outside, the
Citizen made a show of denouncing anyone with noble blood.
Allomancers, however, were too valuable to kill. And so, he chose his
buildings carefully—only burning those with hidden exits
through which he could carefully extract the Allomancers.
It was the perfect
way to show orthodoxy, yet maintain a grip on the city's most
powerful resource. But it wasn't this hypocrisy that made Spook's
hands stop shaking as he charged the soldiers.
It was the crying
child.
"Kill
them!" Kelsier screamed.
Spook whipped out
his dueling cane. One of the soldiers finally noticed him, spinning
in shock.
He fell first.
Spook hadn't
realized how hard he could swing. The soldier's helmet flew through
the hidden passageway, its metal crumpled. The other soldiers cried
out as Spook leaped over their fallen companion in the close
confines. They carried swords, but had trouble drawing them.
Spook, however, had
brought daggers.
He pulled one free,
wielding it with a swing powered by both pewter and fury, enhanced
senses guiding his steps. He cut through two soldiers, elbowing their
dying bodies aside, pressing his advantage. At the end of the
passageway, four soldiers stood with a short skaa man.
Fear shone in their
eyes.
Spook threw himself
forward, and the shocked soldiers finally overcame their surprise.
They pushed backward, throwing open the secret door and stumbling
over themselves as they entered the building basement on the other
side.
The structure was
already well on its way to burning down. Spook could smell the smoke.
The rest of the condemned people were in the room—they had
probably been trying to get through the doorway to follow their
friend who had escaped. Now they were forced backward as the soldiers
shoved their way into the room, finally drawing their swords.
Spook gutted the
slowest of the four soldiers, then left his dagger in the body,
pulling out a second dueling cane. The firm length of wood felt good
in his hand as he spun between shocked civilians, attacking the
soldiers.
"The soldiers
can't be allowed to escape," Kelsier whispered. "Otherwise,
Quellion will know that the people were rescued. You have to leave
him confused."
Light flickered in
a hallway beyond the well-furnished basement room. Firelight. Spook
could feel the heat already. Grimly, the three backlit soldiers
raised their swords. Smoke began to creep in along the ceiling,
spreading like a dark black mist. Prisoners cringed, confused.
Spook dashed
forward, spinning as he swung both of his canes at one of the
soldiers. The man took the bait, sidestepping Spook's attack, then
lunging forward. In an ordinary fight, Spook would have been
skewered.
Pewter and tin
saved him. Spook moved on feet made light, feeling the wind of the
oncoming sword, knowing where it would pass. His heart thudded inside
his chest as the sword sliced through the fabric at his side, but
missed the flesh. He brought a cane down, cracking the man's sword
arm, then smacked another into his skull.
The soldier fell,
surprise visible in his dying eyes as Spook pushed past him.
The next soldier
was already swinging. Spook brought up both of his canes, crossing
them to block. The sword bit through one, spinning half of the cane
into the air, but got caught in the second. Spook snapped his weapon
to the side, pushing the blade away, then spun inside the man's reach
and took him down with an elbow to the stomach.
Spook punched the
man's head as he fell. The sound of bone on bone cracked in the
burning room. The soldier slumped at Spook's feet.
I can actually
do this! Spook thought. I am like them. Vin and Kelsier. No
more hiding in basements or fleeing from danger. I can fight!
He spun, smiling.
And found the final
soldier standing with Spook's own knife held to the neck of a young
girl. The soldier stood with his back to the burning hallway, eyeing
escape through the hidden passage. Behind the man, flames were
curling around the wooden doorframe, licking the room.
"The rest of
you, get out!" Spook said, not turning from the soldier. "Go
out the back door of the building you find at the end of this tunnel.
You'll find men there. They'll hide you in the underground, then get
you out of the city. Go!"
Some had already
fled, and those who remained moved at his command. The soldier stood,
watching, obviously trying to decide his course. He must have known
he was facing an Allomancer—no ordinary man could have taken
down so many soldiers so quickly. Fortunately, it appeared that
Quellion hadn't sent his own Allomancers into the building. He likely
kept them above, protecting him.
Spook stood still.
He dropped the broken dueling cane, but held the other tightly to
keep his hand from shaking. The girl whimpered quietly.
What would
Kelsier have done?
Behind him, the
last of the prisoners was fleeing into the passage. "You!"
Spook said without turning. "Bar that door from the outside.
Quickly!"
"But—"
"Do it!"
Spook yelled.
"No!" the
soldier said, pressing the knife against the girl's neck. "I'll
kill her!"
"Do and you
die," Spook said. "You know that. Look at me. You're not
getting past me. You're—"
The door thunked
closed.
The soldier cried
out, dropping the girl, rushing toward the door, obviously trying to
get to it before the bar fell on the other side. "That's the
only way out! You'll get us—"
Spook broke the
man's knees with a single crack of the dueling cane. The soldier
screamed, falling to the ground. Flames burned on three of the walls,
now. The heat was already intense.
The bar clicked
into place on the other side of the door. Spook looked down at the
soldier. Still alive.
"Leave him,"
Kelsier said. "Let him burn in the building."
Spook hesitated.
"He would have
let all of those people die," Kelsier said. "Let him feel
what he would have done to these—what he has already done
several times, at Quellion's command."
Spook left the
groaning man on the ground, moving over to the secret door. He threw
his weight against it.
It held.
Spook cursed
quietly, raising a boot and kicking the door. It, however, remained
solid.
"That door was
built by noblemen who feared they would be pursued by assassins,"
Kelsier said. "They were familiar with Allomancy, and would make
certain the door was strong enough to resist a Thug's kick."
The fire was
growing hotter. The girl huddled on the floor, whimpering. Spook
whirled, staring down the flames, feeling their heat. He stepped
forward, but his amplified senses were so keen that the heat seemed
amazingly powerful to him.
He gritted his
teeth, picking up the girl.
I have pewter
now, he thought. It can balance the power of my senses.
That will have
to be enough.
Smoke billowed out
the windows of the condemned building. Sazed waited with Breeze and
Allrianne, standing at the back of a solemn crowd. The people were
oddly silent as they watched the flames claim their prize. Perhaps
they sensed the truth.
That they could be
taken and killed as easily as the poor wretches who died inside.
"How quickly
we come around," Sazed whispered. "It wasn't long ago that
men were forced to watch the Lord Ruler cut the heads from innocent
people. Now we do it to ourselves."
Silence. What
sounded like yells came from inside the building. The screams of
dying men.
"Kelsier was
wrong," Breeze said.
Sazed frowned,
turning.
"He blamed the
noblemen," Breeze said. "He thought that if we got rid of
them, things like this wouldn't happen."
Sazed nodded. Then,
oddly, the crowd began to grow restless, shuffling about, murmuring.
And, Sazed felt himself agreeing with them. Something needed to be
done about this atrocity. Why did nobody fight? Quellion stood there,
surrounded by his proud men in red. Sazed gritted his teeth, growing
angry.
"Allrianne,
dear," Breeze said, "this isn't the time."
Sazed started. He
turned, glancing at the young woman. She was crying.
By the
Forgotten Gods, Sazed thought, finally recognizing her touch on
his emotions, Rioting them to make him angry at Quellion. She's
as good as Breeze is.
"Why not?"
she said. "He deserves it. I could make this crowd rip him
apart."
"And his
second-in-command would take control," Breeze said, "then
execute these people. We haven't prepared enough."
"It seems that
you're never done preparing, Breeze," she snapped.
"These things
require—"
"Wait,"
Sazed said, raising a hand. He frowned, watching the building. One of
the building's boarded windows—one high in a peaked attic
section on top of the roof itself—seemed to be shaking.
"Look!"
Sazed said. "There!"
Breeze raised an
eyebrow. "Perhaps our Flame God is about to make his appearance,
eh?" He smiled at what he obviously found a ridiculous concept.
"I wonder what we were supposed to learn during this revolting
little experience. Personally, I think the men who sent us here
didn't know what they—"
One of the planks
suddenly flew off of the window, spinning in the air, swirling smoke
behind it. Then the window burst outward.
A figure in dark
clothing leaped through the shattering mess of boards and smoke,
landing on the rooftop. His long cloak actually appeared to be on
fire in places, and he carried a small bundle in his arms. A child.
The figure rushed along the top of the burning rooftop, then leaped
off the front of the building, trailing smoke as he fell to the
ground.
He landed with the
grace of a man burning pewter, not stumbling despite the two-story
fall, his burning cloak billowing out around him. People backed away,
surprised, and Quellion spun in shock.
The man's hood fell
back as he stood upright. Only then did Sazed recognize him.
Spook stood tall,
seeming in the sunlight to be older than he really was. Or, perhaps,
Sazed had never looked at him as anything but a child until that
moment. Either way, the young man regarded Quellion proudly, eyes
wrapped with a blindfold, his body smoking as he held the coughing
child in his arms. He didn't seem the least bit intimidated by the
troop of twenty soldiers that surrounded the building.
Breeze cursed
quietly. "Allrianne, we're going to need that Riot after all!"
Sazed suddenly felt
a weight pressing against him. Breeze Soothed away his distracting
emotions—his confusion, his concern—and left Sazed, along
with the crowd, completely open to Allrianne's focused burst of
enraged anger.
The crowd exploded
with motion, people crying out in the name of the Survivor, rushing
the guards. For a moment, Sazed feared that Spook wouldn't take the
opportunity to run. Despite the strange bandage on Spook's eyes,
Sazed could tell that the boy was staring straight at Quellion—as
if in challenge.
Fortunately,
however, Spook finally turned away. The crowd distracted the
advancing soldiers, and Spook ran on feet that seemed to move far too
quickly. He ducked down an alleyway, carrying the girl he had
rescued, his cloak trailing smoke. As soon as Spook had a safe head
start, Breeze smothered the crowd's will to rebel, keeping them from
getting themselves cut down by the soldiers. The people backed away,
dispersing. The Citizen's soldiers, however, stayed close around
their leader. Sazed could hear frustration in the Citizen's voice as
he called for the inevitable retreat. He couldn't spare more than a
few men to chase down Spook, not with the potential of a riot. He had
to get himself to safety.
As soldiers marched
away, Breeze turned an eye toward Sazed. "Well," he noted,
"that was somewhat unexpected."

I think that
the koloss were more intelligent than we wanted to give them credit
for being. For instance, originally, they used only spikes the Lord
Ruler gave them to make new members. He would provide the metal and
the unfortunate skaa captives, and the koloss would create new
"recruits."
At the Lord
Ruler's death, then, the koloss should quickly have died out. This
was how he had designed them. If they got free from his control, he
expected them to kill themselves off and end their own rampage.
However, they somehow made the deduction that spikes in the bodies of
fallen koloss could be harvested, then reused.
They then no
longer required a fresh supply of spikes. I often wonder what effect
the constant reuse of spikes had on their population. A spike can
only hold so much of a Hemalurgic charge, so they could not create
spikes that granted infinite strength, no matter how many people
those spikes killed and drew power from. However, did the repeated
reuse of spikes perhaps bring more humanity to the koloss they made?





42
WHEN MARSH
ENTERED LUTHADEL, he was far more careful than he had been
when he'd entered the nameless town at the western border of the
dominance. An Inquisitor moving through the capital of Elend's empire
would not go unreported, and might draw undue attention. The emperor
was gone, and he had left his playground open to be used by others.
No need to spoil that.
So, Marsh moved at
night, hooded cloak up, burning steel and jumping about on coins.
Even so, seeing the magnificent city—sprawling, dirty, yet
still home—was hard for the watching, waiting part of
Marsh. Once, Marsh himself had run the skaa rebellion in this city.
He felt responsible for its occupants, and the thought of Ruin doing
to them what he'd done to the people of the other town, the one where
the ashmount had blown . . .
There was no
ashmount that close to Luthadel. Unfortunately, there were things
Ruin could do to a city that didn't involve natural forces. On his
way to Luthadel, Marsh had stopped at no fewer than four villages,
where he had secretly killed the men guarding their food stores, then
set fire to the buildings that contained them. He knew that the other
Inquisitors went about the world, committing similar atrocities as
they searched for the thing Ruin desired above all others. The thing
Preservation had taken from him.
He had yet to find
it.
Marsh leaped over a
street, landing atop a peaked rooftop, running along its edge and
making his way toward the northeastern side of the city. Luthadel had
changed during the year since he'd last seen it. The Lord Ruler's
forced labor projects had brutalized the skaa, but had kept things
clean of ash and given even the oversized city a sense of order.
There was none of that now. Growing food was obviously a priority—and
keeping the city clean could wait for later, if there was a later.
There were far more
trash heaps now, and mounds of ash—which would have once been
scraped into the river at the center of the city—slumped in
alleys and against buildings. Marsh felt himself begin to smile at
the beauty of the disrepair, and his little, rebellious part withdrew
and hid.
He couldn't fight.
Now was not the time.
He soon arrived at
Keep Venture, seat of Elend's government. It had been invaded by
koloss during the siege of Luthadel, its lower stained-glass windows
shattered by the beasts. The windows had been replaced only by
boards. Marsh smiled, then Steelpush-leaped up to a balcony on the
second floor. He was familiar with this building. Before he'd been
taken by Ruin, he had spent several months living here, helping
Emperor Venture keep control in his city.
Marsh found
Penrod's rooms easily. They were the only ones occupied, and the only
ones guarded. Marsh crouched a few corridors down, watching with his
inhuman eyes as he considered his next course of action.
Impaling an
unwilling subject with a Hemalurgic spike was a very tricky prospect.
The spike's size was, in this case, immaterial. Just as a pinch of
metal dust could fuel Allomancy for a time, or a small ring could
hold a small Feruchemical charge, a rather small bit of metal could
work for Hemalurgy. Inquisitor spikes were made large to be
intimidating, but a small pin could, in many instances, be just as
effective as a massive spike. It depended on how long one wanted to
leave the spike outside of a person's body after using it to kill
someone.
For Marsh's
purposes this day, a small spike was preferable; he didn't want to
give Penrod powers, just pierce him with metal. Marsh pulled out the
spike he had made from the Allomancer in the doomed town a few days
back. It was about five inches long—actually bigger than it
needed to be, strictly speaking. However, Marsh would need to drive
this spike forcefully into a man's body, which meant it needed to be
at least large enough to hold its shape. There were some two or three
hundred bind points across a human's body. Marsh didn't know them
all; Ruin would guide his hand when the time came to strike, making
sure the spike was delivered to the right place. His master's direct
attention was focused elsewhere at the moment, and he was giving
Marsh general commands to get into position and prepare for the
attack.
Hemalurgic spikes.
The hidden part of himself shivered, remembering the day when he had
unexpectedly been made into an Inquisitor. He'd thought that he had
been discovered. He'd been working as a spy for Kelsier in the Steel
Priesthood. Little did he know that he hadn't been singled out as
suspicious—he'd been singled out as extraordinary.
The Inquisitors had
come for him at night, while he'd waited nervously to meet with
Kelsier and pass on what he assumed would be his final message to the
rebellion. They'd burst through the door, moving more quickly than
Marsh could react. They gave him no option. They'd simply slammed him
down against the ground, then thrown a screaming woman on top of him.
Then, the
Inquisitors had pounded a spike right through her heart and into
Marsh's eye.
The pain was too
great for him to remember. That moment was a hole in his memory,
filled with vague images of the Inquisitors repeating this process,
killing other unfortunate Allomancers and pounding their powers—their
very souls, it seemed—into Marsh's body. When it was finished,
he lay groaning on the floor, a new flood of sensory information
making it difficult for him even to think. Around him, the other
Inquisitors had danced about, cutting apart the other bodies with
their axes, rejoicing in the addition of another member to their
ranks.
That was, in a way,
the day of his birth. What a wonderful day. Penrod, however, would
not have such joy. He wasn't to be made into an Inquisitor—he
would get only a single, small spike. One that had been made days
ago, and been allowed to sit outside a body—leaking power—all
that time.
Marsh waited for
Ruin to come to him in force. Not only would the spike have to be
planted precisely, but Penrod would have to leave it in long enough
for Ruin to begin influencing his thoughts and emotions. The spike
had to touch the blood—at first, at least. After the spike was
pounded in, the skin could heal around the metal, and the spike would
still work. However, to begin with, there would be blood.
How did one make a
person forget about five inches of metal sprouting from their body?
How did one make others ignore it? Ruin had tried to get a spike into
Elend Venture on several occasions now, and had always failed. In
fact, most attempts failed. The few people claimed with the process,
however, were worth the effort.
Ruin came upon him,
and he lost control of his body. He moved without knowing what he was
going to do, following direct orders. Down the corridor. Don't
attack the guards. In through the door.
Marsh shoved aside
the two watching soldiers, kicking the door down and bursting into
the antechamber.
Right. To the
bedchamber.
Marsh was through
the room in a heartbeat, the two soldiers belatedly screaming for
help outside. Penrod was an aging man with a dignified air. He had
the presence of mind to leap from his bed at the sounds, grabbing a
hardwood dueling cane from its place atop his nightstand.
Marsh smiled. A
dueling cane? Against an Inquisitor? He pulled his obsidian hand axe
from the sheath at his side.
Fight him, Ruin
said, but do not kill him. Make it a difficult battle, but allow
him to feel that he's holding you off.
It was an odd
request, but Marsh's mind was so directly controlled that he couldn't
even pause to think about it. He could simply leap forward to attack.
It was harder than
it seemed. He had to make sure to strike with the axe in ways that
Penrod could block. Several times, he had to tap speed from one of
his spikes—which doubled as a Feruchemical metalmind—to
suddenly inch his axe in the right direction, lest he accidentally
behead the king of Luthadel.
Yet, Marsh did it.
He cut Penrod a few times, fighting all the while with the small
spike held hidden in his left palm, letting the king think he was
doing well. Within moments, the guards had joined the fight, which
allowed Marsh to keep up appearances even better. Three normal men
against an Inquisitor was still no contest, but from their
perspectives, maybe it would seem like one.
It wasn't long
before a troop of some dozen guards burst into the chamber outside
the bedroom, coming to aid their king.
Now, Ruin
said. Act frightened, get ready to put the spike in, and prepare
to flee out the window.
Marsh tapped speed
and moved. Ruin guided his hand precisely as he slammed his left hand
into Penrod's chest, driving the spike directly into the man's heart.
Marsh heard Penrod scream, smiled at the sound, and leaped out the
window.
A short time later,
Marsh hung outside that same window, unseen and unnoticed, even by
the numerous guard patrols. He was far too skilled, far too careful,
to be spotted listening with tin-enhanced ears, hanging underneath an
outcropping of stone near the window. Inside, surgeons conferred.
"When we try
to pull the spike out, the bleeding increases dramatically, my lord,"
one voice explained.
"The shard of
metal got dangerously close to your heart," said another.
Dangerously
close? Marsh thought with a smile from his upside-down perch.
The spike pierced his heart. But, of course, the surgeons
couldn't know that. Since Penrod was conscious, they would assume
that the spike had come close, but somehow just barely missed.
"We fear
pulling it out," the first surgeon said. "How . . . do you
feel?"
"Remarkably
good, actually," said Penrod. "There is an ache, and some
discomfort. But I feel strong."
"Then let us
leave the shard, for now," the first surgeon said, sounding
concerned. But, what else could he do? If he did pull the
spike out, it would kill Penrod. A clever move by Ruin.
They would wait for
Penrod to regain his strength, then try again to remove the spike.
Again, it would threaten Penrod's life. They'd have to leave it. And,
with Ruin now able to touch his mind—not control him, just
nudge things in certain directions—Penrod would soon forget
about the spike. The discomfort would fade, and with the spike under
his clothing, no one would find it irregular.
And then he would
be Ruin's as surely as any Inquisitor. Marsh smiled, let go of the
outcropping, and dropped to the dark streets below.

For all that it
disgusts me, I cannot help but be impressed by Hemalurgy as an art.
In Allomancy and Feruchemy, skill and subtlety come through the
application of one's powers. The best Allomancer might not be the
most powerful, but instead the one who can best manipulate the Pushes
and Pulls of metals. The best Feruchemist is the one who is most
capable of sorting the information in his copperminds, or best able
to manipulate his weight with iron.
The art that is
unique to Hemalurgy, however, is the knowledge of where to place the
spikes.





43
VIN LANDED
WITH A HUSHED rustle of cloth. She crouched in the night,
holding up her dress to keep it from brushing the ashen rooftop, then
peered into the mists.
Elend dropped
beside her, then fell into a crouch, asking no questions. She smiled,
noting that his instincts were getting better. He watched the mists
too, though he obviously didn't know what he was looking for.
"He's
following us," Vin whispered.
"Yomen's
Mistborn?" Elend asked.
Vin nodded.
"Where?"
he asked.
"Three houses
back," Vin said.
Elend squinted, and
she felt one of his Allomantic pulses suddenly increase in speed. He
was flaring tin.
"That lump on
the right side?" Elend asked.
"Close
enough," Vin said.
"So . . ."
"So, he knows
I've spotted him," Vin said. "Otherwise, I wouldn't have
stopped. Right now, we're studying one another."
Elend reached to
his belt, slipping out an obsidian knife.
"He won't
attack," Vin said.
"How do you
know?"
"Because,"
Vin said. "When he intends to kill us, he'll try to do it when
you and I aren't together—or when we're sleeping."
That seemed to make
Elend even more nervous. "Is that why you've been staying up all
night lately?"
Vin nodded. Forcing
Elend to sleep alone was a small price to pay for keeping him safe.
Is it you back there following us, Yomen? she wondered. On
the night of your own party? That would be quite the feat. It
didn't seem likely; but still, Vin was suspicious. She had a habit of
suspecting everyone of being Mistborn. She still thought it
was healthy, even if she had been wrong more often than not.
"Come on,"
she said, rising. "Once we get into the party, we shouldn't have
to worry about him."
Elend nodded, and
the two continued along their path to the Canton of Resource.
The plan is
simple, Elend had said just hours before. I'll confront
Yomen, and the nobility won't be able to help gathering around to
gawk. At that point, you sneak away and see if you can find your way
to the storage chamber.
It really was a
simple plan—the best ones usually were. If Elend confronted
Yomen, it would keep the attention of the guards on him, hopefully
letting Vin slip out. She'd have to move quickly and quietly, and
would probably have to eliminate some guards—all without
raising an alarm. Yet, this appeared to be the only way in. Not only
was Yomen's fortress-like building well lit and extremely well
guarded, but his Mistborn was good. The man had detected her every
other time she'd tried to sneak in—always remaining at a
distance, his mere presence warning her that he could raise the alarm
in a heartbeat.
Their best chance
was the ball. Yomen's defenses, and his Mistborn, would be focused on
their master, keeping him safe.
They landed in the
courtyard, causing carriages to stop and guards to turn in shock. Vin
glanced to Elend in the misty darkness. "Elend," she said
quietly, "I need you to promise me something."
He frowned. "What?"
"Eventually,
I'm going to get spotted," Vin said. "I'll sneak as best I
can, but I doubt we'll get through this without creating a
disturbance. When it hits, I want you to get out."
"Vin, I can't
do that. I have to—"
"No," Vin
said sharply. "Elend, you don't have to help me. You can't
help me. I love you, but you're just not as good at this as I am. I
can take care of myself, but I need to know that I won't have to take
care of you, too. If anything goes wrong—or, if things go
right, but the building goes on alert—I want you to get out.
I'll meet you at the camp."
"And if you
get into trouble?" Elend said.
Vin smiled. "Trust
me."
He paused, then
nodded. Trusting her was one thing he could obviously do—something
he'd always done.
The two strode
forward. It felt very strange to be attending a ball at a Ministry
building. Vin was accustomed to stained glass and ornamentation, but
Canton offices were generally austere—and this one was no
exception. It was only a single story tall, and it had sharp, flat
walls with very small windows. No limelights illuminated the outside,
and while a couple of large tapestry banners fluttered against the
stonework, the only indication that this night was special was the
cluster of carriages and nobility in the courtyard. The soldiers in
the area had noted Vin and Elend, but made no move to engage—or
even slow—them.
Those watching—both
nobility and soldiers—were interested, but few of them looked
surprised. Vin and Elend were expected. Vin's hunch about that was
confirmed when she moved up the steps, and nobody moved to intercept
them. The guards at the door watched suspiciously, but let her and
Elend pass.
Inside, she found a
long entry hall, lit by lamps. The flow of people turned left, so Vin
and Elend followed, twisting through a few labyrinthine corridors
until they approached a larger meeting hall.
"Not exactly
the most impressive place for a ball, eh?" Elend said as they
waited their turn to be announced.
Vin nodded. Most
noble keeps had exterior entrances directly into their ballroom. The
room ahead—from what she could see of it—had been adapted
from a standard Ministry meeting room. Rivets covered the floor where
benches had once been, and there was a stage on the far side of the
room, where obligators had probably once stood to give instruction to
their subordinates. This was where Yomen's table had been set up.
It was too small to
be a truly practical ballroom. The people inside weren't cramped,
exactly, but neither did they have the space the nobility preferred
for forming separate little groups where they could gossip.
"Looks like
there are other party rooms," Elend said, nodding to several
corridors leading from the main "ballroom." People were
trailing in and out of them.
"Places for
people to go if they feel too crowded," Vin said. "This is
going to be a tough place to escape, Elend. Don't let yourself get
cornered. Looks like an exit over there to the left."
Elend followed her
gaze as they walked into the main room. Flickering torchlight and
trails of mist indicated a courtyard or atrium. "I'll stay close
to it," he said. "And avoid going to any of the smaller
side rooms."
"Good,"
Vin said. She also noted something else—twice during the trip
through the corridors to the ballroom, she'd seen stairwells leading
down. That implied a fairly large basement, something uncommon back
in Luthadel. The Canton building goes down, rather than up,
she decided. It made sense, assuming that there really was a storage
cache below.
The door herald
announced them without needing a card to read from, and the two
entered the room. The party was nowhere near as lavish as the one at
Keep Orielle had been. There were snacks, but no dinner—likely
because there wasn't room for dining tables. There was music and
dancing, but the room was not draped in finery. Yomen had elected to
leave the simple, stark Ministry walls uncovered.
"I wonder why
he even bothers to hold balls," Vin whispered.
"He probably
had to start them," Elend said. "To prompt the other
nobility. Now he's part of the rotation. It's smart of him, though.
It gives a man some measure of power to be able to draw the nobility
into his home and be their host."
Vin nodded, then
eyed the dance floor. "One dance before we split up?"
Elend wavered. "To
tell you the truth, I feel a bit too nervous."
Vin smiled, then
kissed him lightly, completely breaking noble protocol. "Give me
about an hour before the distraction. I want to get a feel for the
party before I sneak away."
He nodded, and they
split, Elend heading directly for a group of men that Vin didn't
recognize. Vin herself kept moving. She didn't want to get bogged
down by conversation, so she avoided the women she recognized from
Keep Orielle. She knew that she should probably have worked to
reinforce her contacts, but the truth was that she felt a little bit
of what Elend did. Not truly nervousness, but rather a desire to
avoid typical ball activities. She wasn't here to mingle. She had
more important tasks to be concerned with.
So, she meandered
through the ballroom, sipping a cup of wine and studying the guards.
There were a lot of them, which was probably good. The more guards
there were in the ballroom, the fewer there would be in the rest of
the building. Theoretically.
Vin kept moving,
nodding to people, but withdrawing anytime one of them tried to make
conversation with her. If she had been Yomen, she would have ordered
a few particular soldiers to keep watch on her, just to make certain
that she didn't stray anywhere sensitive. Yet, none of the men seemed
to be all that focused on her. As the hour passed, she grew more and
more frustrated. Was Yomen really so incompetent that he wouldn't
keep watch on a known Mistborn who entered his home base?
Annoyed, Vin burned
bronze. Perhaps there were Allomancers nearby. She nearly jumped in
shock when she felt the Allomantic pulsings coming from just beside
her.
There were two of
them. Courtly puffs—women whose names she didn't know, but who
looked distinctly dismissible. That was probably the idea. They stood
chatting with a couple of other women a short distance from Vin. One
was burning copper, the other was burning tin—Vin would never
have picked them out if she hadn't had the ability to pierce
copperclouds.
As Vin drifted
through the room, the two followed, moving with an impressive level
of skill as they slid in and out of conversations. They always stuck
close enough to Vin to be within tin-enhanced hearing range, yet
stayed far enough away in the relatively crowded room that Vin would
never have picked them out without Allomantic help.
Interesting,
she thought, moving toward the perimeter of the room. At least
Yomen wasn't underestimating her. But now, how to give the women the
slip? They wouldn't be distracted by Elend's disturbance, and they
certainly wouldn't let Vin sneak away without raising an alarm.
As she wandered,
working on the problem, she noted a familiar figure sitting at the
edge of the ballroom. Slowswift sat in his usual suit, smoking his
pipe as he relaxed in one of the chairs set out for the elderly or
the overdanced. She trailed over toward him.
"I thought you
didn't come to these things," she noted, smiling. Behind, her
two shadows expertly worked their way into a conversation a short
distance away.
"I only come
when my king holds them," Slowswift said.
"Ah," Vin
said, then she drifted away. Out of the corner of her eye, she noted
Slowswift frowning. He'd obviously expected her to speak to him
further, but she couldn't risk his saying anything incriminating. At
least, not yet. Her tails extricated themselves from their
conversation, the speed of Vin's departure forcing them to do so
awkwardly. After walking for a bit, Vin paused, giving the women the
chance to get themselves into yet another conversation.
Then, Vin spun and
walked quickly back to Slowswift, trying to look as if she'd just
remembered something. Her tails, intent on looking natural, had
trouble following. They hesitated, and Vin gained just a few short
breaths of freedom.
She leaned down to
Slowswift as she passed. "I need two men," she said. "Ones
you trust against Yomen. Have them meet me in a part of the party
that is more secluded, a place where people can sit and chat."
"The patio,"
Slowswift said. "Down the left corridor, then outside."
"Good,"
Vin said. "Tell your men to go there, but then wait until I
approach them. Also, please send a messenger to Elend. Tell him I
need another half hour."
Slowswift nodded to
the cryptic comment, and Vin smiled as her shadows trailed closer. "I
hope you feel better soon," she said, putting on a fond smile.
"Thank you, my
dear," Slowswift said, coughing slightly.
Vin trailed away
again. She slowly made her way in the direction Slowswift had
indicated, the exit she'd picked out earlier. Sure enough, a few
moments later she passed into mist. The mist vanishes inside
buildings, eventually, Vin thought. Everyone always assumes
it has something to do with heat, or perhaps the lack of airflow. . .
.
In a few seconds,
she found herself standing on a lantern-lit garden patio. Though
tables had been set up for people to relax, the patio was sparsely
populated. Servants wouldn't go out in the mists, and most
nobility—though they didn't like to admit it—found the
mists disconcerting. Vin wandered over to an ornate metal railing,
then leaned against it, looking up at the sky, feeling the mists
around her and idly fingering her earring.
Soon, her two
shadows appeared, chatting quietly, and Vin's tin let her hear that
they were talking about how stuffy the other room had been. Vin
smiled, maintaining her posture as the two women took chairs a
distance away, continuing to chat. After that, two young men wandered
in and sat down at another table. They weren't as natural about the
process as the women, but Vin hoped they weren't suspicious enough to
draw attention.
Then, she waited.
Life as a thief—a
life spent preparing for jobs, watching in spy holes, and carefully
choosing just the right opportunity to pick a pocket—had taught
her patience. It was one urchin attribute she had never lost. She
stood, staring at the sky, giving no indication at all that she
intended to leave. Now, she simply had to wait for the distraction.
You shouldn't
have relied on him for the distraction, Reen whispered in her
mind. He'll fail. Never let your life depend on the competence of
someone whose life isn't also on the line.
It had been one of
Reen's favorite sayings. She didn't think of him very often,
anymore—or, really, anyone from her old life. That life had
been one of pain and sorrow. A brother who beat her to keep her safe,
a crazy mother who had inexplicably slaughtered Vin's baby sister.
However, that life
was only a faint echo, now. She smiled to herself, amused at how far
she had come. Reen might have called her a fool, but she trusted
Elend—trusted him to succeed, trusted him with her life. That
was something she could never have done during her early years.
After about ten
minutes, someone came out from the party and wandered over to the
pair of women. He spoke with them just briefly, then returned to the
party. Another man came twenty minutes after that, doing the same
thing. Hopefully, the women were passing on the information Vin
wished: that Vin had apparently decided to spend an indeterminate
amount of time outside, staring at the mists. Those inside wouldn't
expect her to return anytime soon.
A few moments after
the second messenger returned to the party, a man rushed out and
approached one of the tables. "You have to come hear this!"
he whispered to the people at the table—the only ones currently
on the patio who had nothing to do with Vin. That group left. Vin
smiled. Elend's distraction had come.
Vin jumped into the
air, then Pushed against the railing beside her, launching herself
across the patio.
The women had
obviously grown bored, chatting idly to themselves. It took them a
few moments to notice Vin's movement. In those moments, Vin shot
across the now-empty patio, dress flapping as she flew. One of the
women opened her mouth to yell.
Vin extinguished
her metals, then burned duralumin and brass, Pushing on the
emotions of both women.
She'd done this
only once before, to Straff Venture. A duralumin-fueled Brass-push
was a terrible thing; it flattened a person's emotions, making them
feel empty, completely void of all feeling. Both women gasped, and
the one who had been standing stumbled to the ground instead, falling
silent.
Vin landed hard,
her pewter still off lest she mix it with duralumin. She put her
pewter back on immediately, however, rolling up to her feet. She took
one of the women with an elbow to the stomach, then grabbed her face
and slammed it down into the table, knocking her out. The other woman
sat dazedly on the ground. Vin grimaced, then grabbed the woman by
the throat, choking her.
It felt brutal, but
Vin didn't let up until the woman fell unconscious—proven by
the fact that she let her Allomantic coppercloud fall. Vin sighed,
releasing the woman. The unconscious spy slumped to the floor.
Vin turned.
Slowswift's young men stood by anxiously. Vin waved them over.
"Stash these
two in the bushes," Vin said quickly, "then sit at the
table. If anyone asks after them, say that you saw them follow me
back into the party. Hopefully, that will keep everyone confused."
The men flushed.
"We—"
"Do as I say
or flee," Vin snapped. "Don't argue with me. I left them
both alive, and I can't afford to let them report that I've escaped
their watch. If they stir, you'll have to knock them out again."
The men nodded
reluctantly.
Vin reached up and
unbuttoned her dress, letting the garment fall to the ground and
revealing the sleek, dark clothing she wore underneath. She gave the
dress to the men to hide as well, then moved into the building, away
from the party. Inside the misty corridor, she found a stairwell, and
slipped down it. Elend's distraction would be in full progress by
now. Hopefully, it would last long enough.
"That's
right," Elend said, arms folded, staring down Yomen. "A
duel. Why make the armies fight for the city? You and I could settle
this ourselves."
Yomen didn't laugh
at the ridiculous idea. He simply sat at his table, his thoughtful
eyes set in a bald, tattooed head, the single bead of atium tied to
his forehead sparkling in the lantern-light. The rest of the crowd
was reacting just as Elend had expected. Conversations had died, and
people had rushed in, packing into the main ballroom to watch the
confrontation between emperor and king.
"Why do you
think that I would consent to such a thing?" Yomen finally
asked.
"All accounts
say that you are a man of honor."
"But you are
not," Yomen said, pointing at Elend. "This very offer
proves that. You are an Allomancer—there would be no contest
between us. What honor would there be in that?"
Elend didn't really
care. He just wanted Yomen occupied as long as possible. "Then
choose a champion," he said. "I'll fight him instead."
"Only a
Mistborn would be a match for you," Yomen said.
"Then send one
against me."
"Alas, I have
none. I won my kingdom through fairness, legality, and the Lord
Ruler's grace—not through threat of assassination, like
yourself."
No Mistborn,
you say? Elend thought, smiling. So, your "fairness,
legality, and grace" don't preclude lying? "You would
really let your people die?" Elend said loudly, sweeping his
hand across the room. More and more people were gathering to watch.
"All because of your pride?"
"Pride?"
Yomen said, leaning forward. "You call it pride to defend your
own rule? I call it pride to march your armies into another man's
kingdom, seeking to intimidate him with barbaric monsters."
"Monsters your
own Lord Ruler created and used to intimidate and conquer as well,"
Elend said.
Yomen paused. "Yes,
the Lord Ruler created the koloss," he said. "It was his
prerogative to determine how they were used. Besides, he kept them
far away from civilized cities—yet you march them right up to
our doorstep."
"Yes,"
Elend said, "and they haven't attacked. That's because I can
control them as the Lord Ruler did. Wouldn't that suggest that I have
inherited his right to rule?"
Yomen frowned,
perhaps noticing that Elend's arguments kept changing—that he
was saying whatever came to mind in order to keep the discussion
going.
"You may be
unwilling to save this city," Elend said, "but there are
others in it who are wiser. You don't think I came here without
allies, do you?"
Yomen paused again.
"Yes,"
Elend said, scanning the crowd. "You're not just fighting me,
Yomen. You're fighting your own people. Which ones will betray you,
when the time comes? How well can you trust them, exactly?"
Yomen snorted.
"Idle threats, Venture. What is this really about?"
However, Elend could tell that his words bothered Yomen. The man
didn't trust the local nobility. He would have been a fool
to do so.
Elend smiled,
preparing his next argument. He could keep this discussion going for
quite some time. For, if there was one thing in particular that he
had learned by growing up in his father's house it was this: how to
annoy people.
You have your
distraction, Vin, Elend thought. Let's hope you can end the
fight for this city before it really begins.

Each spike,
positioned very carefully, can determine how the recipient's body is
changed by Hemalurgy. A spike in one place creates a monstrous,
near-mindless beast. In another place, a spike will create a
crafty—yet homicidal—Inquisitor.
Without the
instinctive knowledge granted by taking the power at the Well of
Ascension, Rashek would never have been able to use Hemalurgy. With
his mind expanded, and with a little practice, he was able to intuit
where to place spikes that would create the servants he wanted.
It is a
little-known fact that the Inquisitors' torture chambers were
actually Hemalurgic laboratories. The Lord Ruler was constantly
trying to develop new breeds of servant. It is a testament to
Hemalurgy's complexity that, despite a thousand years of trying, he
never managed to create anything with it beyond the three kinds of
creatures he developed during those few brief moments holding the
power.





44
VIN CREPT
DOWN THE STONE STAIRWELL, small sounds echoing eerily from
below. She had no torch or lantern, and the stairwell was not lit,
but enough light reflected up from below to let her tin-enhanced eyes
see.
The more she
thought about it, the more the large basement made sense. This was
the Canton of Resource—the arm of the Ministry that had been in
charge of feeding the people, maintaining the canals, and supplying
the other Cantons. Vin supposed that this basement had once been well
stocked with supplies. If the cache really was here, it would be the
first that she had discovered hidden beneath a Canton of Resource
building. Vin expected great things from it. What better place to
hide your atium and your most important resources than with an
organization that was in charge of transportation and storage across
the entire empire?
The stairwell was
simple, utilitarian, and steep. Vin wrinkled her nose at the musty
air, which seemed all the more stuffy to her tin-enhanced sense of
smell. Still, she was grateful for tin's enhanced vision, not to
mention the enhanced hearing, which let her hear clinking armor
below—an indication that she needed to move quite carefully.
And so she did. She
reached the bottom of the stairwell and peeked around the corner.
Three narrow stone corridors split off from the stairwell landing,
each heading in a different direction at ninety-degree angles. The
sounds were coming from the right, and as Vin leaned out a bit more,
she nearly jumped as she saw a pair of guards standing lazily against
the wall a short distance away.
Guards standing
in the corridors, Vin thought, ducking back into the stairwell.
Yomen definitely wants to protect something down here.
Vin crouched down
on the rough, cool stone. Pewter, steel, and iron were of relatively
little use at the moment. She could take down both guards, but it
would be risky, since she couldn't afford to make any noise. She
didn't know where the cache was—and therefore couldn't afford
to make a disturbance, not yet.
Vin closed her
eyes, burning brass and zinc. She carefully—and slowly—Soothed
the emotions of the two soldiers. She heard them settle back, leaning
against the side of the corridor. Then, she Rioted their sense of
boredom, tugging on that single emotion. She peeked around the corner
again, keeping the pressure on, waiting.
One of the men
yawned. A few seconds later, the other one did. Then they both yawned
at once. And Vin scuttled straight across the landing and into the
shadowed hallway beyond. She pressed herself up against the wall,
heart beating quickly, and waited. No cry came, though one of the
guards did mumble something about being tired.
Vin smiled in
excitement. It had been a long time since she'd had to truly sneak.
She had spied and scouted, but had trusted on the mists, the
darkness, and her ability to move quickly to protect her. This was
different. It reminded her of the days when she and Reen had burgled
houses.
What would my
brother say now? she wondered, padding down the corridor on
unnaturally light, quiet feet. He'd think I've gone crazy,
sneaking into a building not for wealth, but for information. To
Reen, life had been about survival—the simple, harsh facts of
survival. Trust nobody. Make yourself invaluable to your team, but
don't be too threatening. Be ruthless. Stay alive.
She hadn't
abandoned his lessons. They'd always be part of her—they were
what had kept her alive and careful, even during her years with
Kelsier's crew. She just no longer listened to them exclusively. She
tempered them with trust and hope.
Your trust will
get you killed someday, Reen seemed to whisper in the back of
her mind. But, of course, even Reen himself hadn't stuck to his code
perfectly. He'd died protecting Vin, refusing to give her up to the
Inquisitors, even though doing so might have saved his life.
Vin continued
forward. It soon became evident that the basement was an extensive
grid of narrow corridors surrounding larger rooms. She peeked into
one, creaking the door open, and found some supplies. They were basic
kinds of things, flour and the like—not the carefully canned,
organized, and catalogued long-term supplies of a storage cache.
There must be a
loading dock down one of these corridors, Vin guessed. It
probably slopes up, leading to that subcanal that runs into the city.
Vin moved on, but
she knew she wouldn't have time to search each of the basement's many
rooms. She approached another intersection of corridors, and crouched
down, frowning. Elend's diversion wouldn't last forever, and someone
would eventually discover the women she'd knocked unconscious. She
needed to get to the cache quickly.
She glanced around.
The corridors were sparsely lit by the occasional lamp. Yet, there
seemed to be more light coming from the left. She moved down this
corridor, and the lamps became more frequent. Soon, she caught the
sound of voices, and she moved more carefully, approaching another
intersection. She peeked down it. To the left, she noted a pair of
soldiers standing in the distance. To her right, there were four.
Right it is,
then, she thought. However, this was going to be a little more
difficult.
She closed her
eyes, listening carefully. She could hear both groups of soldiers,
but there seemed to be something else. Other groups in the distance.
Vin picked one of these and begin to Pull with a powerful Riot of
emotions. Soothing and Rioting weren't blocked by stone or
steel—during the days of the Final Empire, the Lord Ruler had
set up Soothers in various sections of the skaa slums, letting them
Soothe away the emotions of everyone nearby, affecting hundreds, even
thousands, of people at once.
She waited. Nothing
happened. She was trying to Riot the men's sense of anger and
irritability. However, she didn't even know if she was Pulling in the
right direction. In addition, Rioting and Soothing weren't as precise
as Pushing steel. Breeze always explained that the emotional makeup
of a person was a complex jumble of thoughts, instincts, and
feelings. An Allomancer couldn't control minds or actions. He could
only nudge.
Unless . . .
Taking a deep
breath, Vin extinguished all of her metals. Then, she burned
duralumin and zinc, and Pulled in the direction of the
distant guards, hitting them with a powerfully enhanced burst of
emotional Allomancy.
Immediately, a
curse echoed through the hallway. Vin cringed. Fortunately, the noise
wasn't directed at her. The guards in the corridor perked up, and the
argument in the distance grew louder, more fervent. Vin didn't need
to burn tin to hear when the scuffle broke out, men yelling at each
other.
The guards to the
left rushed away, moving to find out what the source of the
disturbance was. The ones to her right left two men behind, however,
and so Vin drank a vial of metal, then Rioted their emotions,
enhancing their senses of curiosity to the point of breaking.
The two men left,
rushing after their companions, and Vin scurried down the corridor.
She soon saw that her instincts had proven right—the four men
had been guarding a door into one of the storage rooms. Vin took a
deep breath, then opened the door and ducked inside. The trapdoor
inside was closed, but she knew what to look for. She pulled it open,
then jumped into the darkness beneath her.
She Pushed down a
coin as she fell, using the sound of its hitting to let her know how
far down the floor was. She landed on rough stonework, standing in
complete darkness—pitch black beyond even what tin would let
her see in. She felt around, however, and found a lantern on the
wall. She pulled out her flint, and soon had light.
And there it was,
the door in the wall leading into the storage cavern. The rock
mountings had been torn apart, the door forced. The wall was still
there, and the door itself was intact, but getting it open had
obviously taken some great amount of work. The door was open
slightly, barely wide enough for a person to get through. It had
obviously taken Yomen a lot of effort to even get it that far.
He must have
known it was here, Vin thought, standing up straight. But .
. . why break it open like this? He has a Mistborn who could have
opened the door with a Steelpull.
Heart fluttering in
anticipation, Vin slipped through the opening and into the silent
storage cache. She immediately jumped down to the cache floor and
began searching for the plate that would contain the Lord Ruler's
information. She just had to—
Stone scraped
against stone behind her.
Vin spun, feeling
an instant of sharp and dreadful realization.
The stone door shut
behind her.
". . . and
that," Elend said, "is why the Lord Ruler's system
of government had to fall."
He was losing them.
He could tell—more and more people were trailing away from the
argument. The problem was, Yomen actually was interested.
"You make a
mistake, young Venture," the obligator said, tapping the table
idly with his fork. "The sixth-century stewardship program was
not even devised by the Lord Ruler. The newly formed Canton of
Inquisition proposed it as a means of population control for the
Terris, and the Lord Ruler agreed to it provisionally."
"That
provision turned into a means of subjugating an entire race of
people," Elend said.
"That
subjugation started far earlier," Yomen said. "Everyone
knows the history of this, Venture. The Terris were a people who
absolutely refused to submit to imperial rule, and they had to be
strictly reined in. However, can you honestly say that Terris
stewards were treated poorly? They're the most honored servants in
all of the empire!"
"I'd hardly
call being made into a favored slave a fair return for losing one's
manhood," Elend said, raising an eyebrow and folding his arms.
"There are at
least a dozen sources I could quote you on that," Yomen said
with a wave of his hand. "What about Trendalan? He claimed that
being made a eunuch had left him free to pursue more potent thoughts
of logic and of harmony, since he wasn't distracted by worldly
lusts."
"He didn't
have a choice in the matter," Elend said.
"Few of us
have choice in our stations," Yomen replied.
"I prefer
people to have that choice," Elend said. "You'll notice
that I have given the skaa freedom in my lands, and given the
nobility a parliamentary council by which they have a hand in ruling
the city in which they live."
"High ideals,"
Yomen said, "and I recognize Trendalan's own words in what you
claim to have done. However, even he said that it would be unlikely
for such a system to continue in stability for very long."
Elend smiled. It
had been a long time since he'd had such a good argument. Ham never
delved deeply into topics—he liked philosophical questions, but
not scholarly debates—and Sazed just didn't like to argue.
I wish I could
have met Yomen when I was younger, Elend thought. Back when
I had time to simply worry about philosophy. Oh, the discussions we
could have had . . . .
Of course, those
discussions probably would have ended up with Elend in the hands of
the Steel Inquisitors for being a revolutionary. Still, he had to
admit that Yomen was no fool. He knew his history and his politics—he
just happened to have completely erroneous beliefs. Another day,
Elend would have been happy to persuade him of that fact.
Unfortunately, this
particular argument was growing increasingly tense for Elend. He
couldn't maintain both Yomen's attention and that of the crowd. Each
time he tried to do something to get the crowd back, Yomen seemed to
get suspicious—and each time Elend actually tried to engage the
king, the crowd itself grew bored with the philosophical debate.
So it was that
Elend was actually relieved when the yells of surprise finally came.
Seconds later, a pair of soldiers rushed into the room, carrying a
dazed and bloodied young woman in a ball gown.
Lord Ruler,
Vin! Elend thought. Was that really necessary?
Elend glanced back
at Yomen, and the two shared a look. Then Yomen stood. "Where is
the empress Venture!" he demanded.
Time to go,
Elend thought, remembering his promise to Vin. However,
something occurred to him. I'll probably never have another
chance to get this close to Yomen, Elend thought. And
there's one sure way to prove whether or not he's an Allomancer.
Try to kill
him.
It was bold,
perhaps foolish, but he was growing certain he'd never convince Yomen
to surrender his city. He'd claimed that he wasn't Mistborn; it was
very important to see if he was lying or not. So, trusting his
instincts in this matter, Elend dropped a coin and Pushed himself up
onto the stage. Ballgoers began to cry out, their idyllic world
shattering as Elend whipped out a pair of glass daggers. Yomen paled
and backed away. Two guards who had been pretending to be Yomen's
dinner partners stood up from their seats, pulling staves from
beneath the table.
"You liar,"
Yomen spat as Elend landed on the dining table. "Thief, butcher,
tyrant!"
Elend shrugged,
then shot coins at the two guards, easily dropping them both. He
jumped for Yomen, grabbing the man around the neck, yanking him
backward. Gasps and screams came from the crowd.
Elend squeezed,
choking Yomen. No strength flooded the man's limbs. No Allomantic
Pull or Push tried to shake him from Elend's grasp. The obligator
barely even struggled.
Either he's no
Allomancer, Elend thought, or he's one hell of an actor.
He let Yomen go,
pushing the king back toward his dining table. Elend shook his
head—that was one mystery that was—
Yomen jumped
forward, pulling out a glass knife, slashing. Elend started, ducking
backward, but the knife hit, slicing a gash in his forearm. The cut
blazed with pain, enhanced by Elend's tin, and Elend cursed,
stumbling away.
Yomen struck again,
and Elend should have been able to dodge. He had pewter, and
Yomen was still moving with the clumsiness of an unenhanced man. Yet,
the attack moved with Elend, somehow managing to take him in the
side. Elend grunted, blood hot on his skin, and he looked into
Yomen's eyes. The king pulled the knife free, easily dodging Elend's
counterstrike. It was almost like . . .
Elend burned
electrum, giving himself a bubble of false atium images. Yomen
hesitated immediately, looking confused.
He's burning
atium, Elend thought with shock. That means he is
Mistborn!
Part of Elend
wanted to stay and fight, but the cut in his side was bad—bad
enough that he knew he needed to get it taken care of soon. Cursing
his own stupidity, he Pushed himself into the air, dropping blood on
the terrified nobility clustered below. He should have listened to
Vin—he was going to get a serious lecture when he got back to
camp.
He landed, and
noted that Yomen had chosen not to follow. The obligator king stood
behind his table, holding a knife red with Elend's blood, watching
with anger.
Elend turned,
throwing up a handful of coins and Pushing them into the air above
the heads of the ballgoers—careful not to hit any of them. They
cowered in fear, throwing themselves to the ground. Once the coins
landed, Elend Pushed off of them to send himself in a short, low jump
through the room and toward the exit Vin had indicated. Soon, he
entered an outdoor patio cloaked with mist.
He glanced back at
the building, feeling frustrated, though he didn't know why. He had
done his part—he'd kept Yomen and his guests distracted for a
good half hour. True, he'd gotten himself wounded, but he had
discovered that Yomen was an Allomancer. That was worth knowing.
He dropped a coin
and shot himself into the air.
Three hours later,
Elend sat in the command tent with Ham, waiting quietly.
He got his side and
arm patched. Vin didn't arrive.
He told the others
about what had happened. Vin didn't arrive.
Ham forced him to
get something to eat. Elend paced for an hour after that, and still
Vin did not return.
"I'm going
back," Elend said, standing.
Ham looked up. "El,
you lost a lot of blood. I'd guess that only pewter is
keeping you on your feet."
It was true. Elend
could feel the edges of fatigue beneath his veil of pewter. "I
can handle it."
"You'll kill
yourself that way," Ham said.
"I don't care.
I—" Elend cut off as his tin-enhanced ears heard someone
approaching the tent. He pulled back the flaps before the man even
arrived, startling him.
"My lord!"
the man said. "Message from the city."
Elend snatched the
letter, ripping it open.
Pretender
Venture, the note said, I have her, as you have probably
guessed. There's one thing I've always noted about Mistborn. To a
man, they are overconfident. Thank you for the stimulating
conversation. I'm glad I was able to keep you distracted for so long.
King Yomen.

Vin sat quietly in
the dark cavern. Her back rested against the stone block that was the
door to her prison. Beside her, on the rock floor, sat the dwindling
lantern she'd brought into the massive room.
She'd Pushed and
she'd Pulled, trying to force her way out. However, she'd soon
realized that the broken stones she'd seen on the outside—the
work project she'd assumed had been used to open the door—had
actually had a different purpose. Yomen had apparently removed the
metal plates inside the door, the ones that an Allomancer could Push
or Pull on to open it. That left the door as simply a stone block.
With duralumin-enhanced pewter, she should have been able to push
even that open. Unfortunately, she found it difficult to get leverage
on the floor, which sloped down away from the block. In addition,
they must have done something to the hinges—or perhaps even
piled up more rock against the other side—for she couldn't get
the door to budge.
She ground her
teeth in frustration, sitting with her back to the stone door. Yomen
had set an intentional trap for her. Had she and Elend been that
predictable? Regardless, it was a brilliant move. Yomen knew he
couldn't fight them. So, instead, he'd simply captured Vin. It had
the same effect, but without any of the risks. And she'd fallen right
into the trap.
She'd searched the
entire room, trying to find a way out, but had come up with nothing.
Even worse, she'd located no hidden stock of atium. It was hard to
tell with all the cans of food and other sources of metal, but her
initial search hadn't been promising.
"Of course it
won't be in here," she muttered to herself. "Yomen wouldn't
have had time to pull out all of these cans, but if he were planning
to trap me, he certainly would have removed the atium. I'm such an
idiot!"
She leaned back,
annoyed, frustrated, exhausted.
I hope Elend
did what I said, Vin thought. If he had gotten captured too . .
.
Vin knocked her
head back against the obstinate stones, frustrated.
Something sounded
in the darkness.
Vin froze, then
quickly scrambled up into a crouch. She checked her metal
reserves—she had plenty, for the moment.
I'm probably
just —
It came again. A
soft footfall. Vin shivered, realizing that she had only cursorily
checked the chamber, and then she'd been searching for atium and
other ways out. Could someone have been hiding inside the entire
time?
She burned bronze,
and felt him. An Allomancer. Mistborn. The one she had felt before;
the man she had chased.
So that's it!
she thought. Yomen did want his Mistborn to fight
us—but he knew he had to separate us first! She smiled,
standing. It wasn't a perfect situation, but it was better than
thinking about the immobile door. A Mistborn she could beat, then
hold hostage until they released her.
She waited until
the man was close—she could tell by the beating of the
Allomantic pulses that she hoped he didn't know she could feel—then
spun, kicking her lantern toward him. She jumped forward, guiding
herself toward her enemy, who stood outlined by the lantern's last
flickers. He looked up at her as she soared through the air, her
daggers out.
And she recognized
his face.
Reen.






PART FOUR
BEAUTIFUL
DESTROYER
A man with a
given power—such as an Allomantic ability—who then gained
a Hemalurgic spike granting that same power would be nearly twice as
strong as a natural unenhanced Allomancer.
An Inquisitor
who was a Seeker before his transformation would therefore have an
enhanced ability to use bronze. This simple fact explains how many
Inquisitors were able to pierce copperclouds.





45
VIN LANDED,
ABORTING HER ATTACK, but still tense, eyes narrow with
suspicion. Reen was backlit by the fitful lantern-light, looking much
as she remembered. The four years had changed him, of course—he
was taller, broader of build—but he had the same hard face,
unrelieved by humor. His posture was familiar to her; during her
childhood, he had often stood as he did now, arms folded in
disapproval.
It all returned to
her. Things she thought she'd banished into the dark, quarantined
parts of her mind: blows from Reen's hand, harsh criticism from his
tongue, furtive moves from city to city.
And yet, tempering
these memories was an insight. She was no longer the young girl who
had borne her beatings in confused silence. Looking back, she could
see the fear Reen had shown in the things he had done. He'd been
terrified that his half-breed Allomancer of a sister would be
discovered and slaughtered by the Steel Inquisitors. He'd beaten her
when she made herself stand out. He'd yelled at her when she was too
competent. He'd moved her when he'd feared that the Canton of
Inquisition had caught their trail.
Reen had died
protecting her. He had taught her paranoia and distrust out of a
twisted sense of duty, for he'd believed that was the only way she
would survive on the streets of the Final Empire. And, she'd stayed
with him, enduring the treatment. Inside—not even buried all
that deeply—she'd known something very important. Reen had
loved her.
She looked up and
met the eyes of the man standing in the cavern. Then, she slowly
shook her head. No, she thought. It looks like him, but
those eyes are not his.
"Who are you?"
she demanded.
"I'm your
brother," the creature said, frowning. "It's only been a
few years, Vin. You've grown brash—I thought I'd taught you
better than that."
He certainly
has the mannerisms down, Vin thought, walking forward warily.
How did he learn them? Nobody thought that Reen was of any
importance during his life. They wouldn't have known to study him.
"Where did you
get his bones?" Vin asked, circling the creature. The cavern
floor was rough and lined with burgeoning shelves. Darkness extended
in all directions. "And how did you get the face so perfect? I
thought kandra had to digest a body to make a good copy."
He had to be a
kandra, after all. How else would someone manage such a perfect
imitation? The creature turned, regarding her with a confused
expression. "What is this nonsense? Vin, I realize that we're
not exactly the type to reunite with a fond embrace, but I did
at least expect you to recognize me."
Vin ignored the
complaints. Reen, then Breeze, had taught her too well. She'd know
Reen if she saw him. "I need information," she said. "About
one of your kind. He is called TenSoon, and he returned to your
Homeland a year ago. He said he was going to be put on trial. Do you
know what happened to him? I would like to contact him, if possible."
"Vin,"
the false Reen said firmly, "I am not a kandra."
We'll see about
that, Vin thought, reaching out with zinc and hitting the
impostor with a duralumin-fueled blast of emotional Allomancy.
He didn't even
stumble. Such an attack would have put a kandra under Vin's control,
just as it did with koloss. Vin wavered. It was growing difficult to
see the impostor in the waning lantern-light, even with tin enhancing
her eyes.
The failed
emotional Allomancy meant that he wasn't a kandra. But he wasn't Reen
either. There seemed only one logical course to follow.
She attacked.
Whoever the
impostor was, he knew her well enough to anticipate this move. Though
he exclaimed in mock surprise, he immediately jumped back, getting
out of her reach. He moved on light feet—light enough that Vin
was reasonably certain he was burning pewter. In fact, she could
still feel the Allomantic pulses coming from him, though for some
reason it was hard for her to pin down exactly which metals he was
burning.
Either way, the
Allomancy was an additional confirmation of her suspicions. Reen had
not been an Allomancer. True, he could have Snapped during their time
apart, but she didn't think he had any noble blood to impart him an
Allomantic heritage. Vin had gotten her powers from her father, the
parent she and Reen had not shared.
She attacked
experimentally, testing this impostor's skill. He stayed out of her
reach, watching carefully as she alternately prowled and attacked.
She tried to corner him against the shelves, but he was too careful
to be caught.
"This is
pointless," the impostor said, jumping away from her again.
No coins, Vin
thought. He doesn't use coins to jump.
"You'd have to
expose yourself too much to actually hit me, Vin," the impostor
said, "and I'm obviously good enough to stay out of your reach.
Can't we stop this and get on to more important matters? Aren't you
even a bit curious as to what I've been doing these last four years?"
Vin backed into a
crouch, like a cat preparing to pounce, and smiled.
"What?"
the impostor asked.
At that moment, her
stalling paid off. Behind them, the overturned lantern finally
flickered out, plunging the cavern into darkness. But Vin, with her
ability to pierce copperclouds, could still sense her enemy. She'd
dropped her coin pouch back when she'd first sensed someone in the
room—she bore no metal to give him warning of her approach.
She launched
herself forward, intending to grab her enemy around the neck and pull
him into a pin. The Allomantic pulses didn't let her see him, but
they did tell her exactly where he was. That would be enough of an
edge.
She was wrong. He
dodged her just as easily as he had before.
Vin fell still.
Tin, she thought. He can hear me coming.
So, she kicked over
a storage shelf, then attacked again as the crash of the falling
shelf echoed loudly in the chamber, spilling cans across the floor.
The impostor evaded
her again. Vin froze. Something was very wrong. Somehow, he always
sensed her. The cavern fell silent. Neither sound nor light bounced
off its walls. Vin crouched, the fingers of one hand resting lightly
on the cool stone before her. She could feel the thumping, his
Allomantic power washing across her in waves. She focused on it,
trying to differentiate the metals that had produced it. Yet, the
pulses felt opaque. Muddled.
There's
something familiar about them, she realized. When I first
sensed this impostor, I thought . . . I thought he was the mist
spirit.
There was a reason
the pulses felt familiar. Without the light to distract her, making
her connect the figure with Reen, she could see what she'd been
missing.
Her heart began to
beat quickly, and for the first time this evening—imprisonment
included—she began to feel afraid. The pulses felt just like
the ones she'd felt a year ago. The pulses that had led her to the
Well of Ascension.
"Why have you
come here?" she whispered to the blackness.
Laughter. It rang
in the empty cavern, loud, free. The thumpings approached, though no
footsteps marked the thing's movement. The pulses suddenly grew
enormous and overpowering. They washed across Vin, unbounded by the
cavern's echoes, an unreal sound that passed through things both
living and dead. She stepped backward in the darkness, and nearly
tripped over the shelves she'd knocked down.
I should have
known you wouldn't be fooled, a kindly voice said in her head.
The thing's voice. She'd heard it only once before, a year ago, when
she'd released it from its imprisonment in the Well of Ascension.
"What do you
want?" she whispered.
You know what I
want. You've always known.
And she did. She
had sensed it in the moment when she had touched the thing. Ruin, she
called it. It had very simple desires. To see the world come to its
end.
"I will stop
you," she said. Yet, it was hard to not feel foolish speaking
the words to a force she did not understand, a thing that existed
beyond men and beyond worlds.
It laughed again,
though this time the sound was only inside her head. She could still
feel Ruin pulsing—though not from any one specific place. It
surrounded her. She forced herself to stand up straight.
Ah, Vin, Ruin
said, its voice almost fatherly in tone. You act as if I were
your enemy.
"You are my
enemy. You seek to end the things I love."
And is an
ending always bad? it asked. Must not all things, even
worlds, someday end?
"There is no
need to hasten that end," Vin said. "No reason to force
it."
All things are
subject to their own nature, Vin, Ruin said, seeming to flow
around her. She could feel its touch upon her—wet and delicate,
like mist. You cannot blame me for being what I am. Without me,
nothing would end. Nothing could end. And therefore, nothing
could grow. I am life. Would you fight life itself?
Vin fell silent.
Do not mourn
because the day of this world's end has arrived, Ruin said. That
end was ordained the very day of the world's conception. There is a
beauty in death—the beauty of finality, the beauty of
completion.
For nothing is
truly complete until the day it is finally destroyed.
"Enough,"
Vin snapped, feeling alone and smothered in the chill darkness. "Stop
taunting me. Why have you come here?"
Come here? it
asked. Why do you ask that?
"What is your
purpose in appearing now?" Vin said. "Have you simply come
to gloat over my imprisonment?"
I have not
"just appeared," Vin, Ruin said. Why, I have never
left. I've always been with you. A part of you.
"Nonsense,"
Vin said. "You only just revealed yourself."
I revealed
myself to your eyes, yes, Ruin said. But, I see that you do
not understand. I've always been with you, even when you could not
see me.
It paused, and
there was silence, both outside and inside of her head.
When you're
alone, no one can betray you, a voice whispered in the back of
her mind. Reen's voice. The voice she heard sometimes, almost real,
like a conscience. She'd taken it for granted that the voice was just
part of her psyche—a leftover from Reen's teachings. An
instinct.
Anyone will
betray you, Vin, the voice said, repeating a bit of advice it
commonly gave. As it spoke, it slowly slid from Reen's voice into
that of Ruin. Anyone.
I've always
been with you. You've heard me in your mind since your first years of
life.

Ruin's escape
deserves some explanation. This is a thing that even I had a problem
understanding.
Ruin could not
have used the power at the Well of Ascension. It was of Preservation,
Ruin's fundamental opposite. Indeed, a direct confrontation of these
two forces would have caused the destruction of both.
Ruin's prison,
however, was fabricated of that power. Therefore, it was attuned to
the power of Preservation—the very power of the Well. When that
power was released and dispersed, rather than utilized, it acted as a
key. The subsequent "unlocking" is what finally freed Ruin.





46
"ALL
RIGHT," BREEZE SAID, "so does somebody want to
speculate on how our team's spy ended up becoming a pseudo-religious
vigilante freedom fighter?"
Sazed shook his
head. They sat in their cavern lair beneath the Canton of
Inquisition. Breeze, declaring that he was tired of travel rations,
had ordered several of the soldiers to break open some of the
cavern's supplies to prepare a more suitable meal. Sazed might have
complained, but the truth was that the cavern was so well stocked
that even a determinedly eating Breeze wouldn't be able to make a
dent in it.
They had waited all
day for Spook to return to the lair. Tensions in the city were high,
and most of their contacts had gone to ground, weathering the
Citizen's paranoia regarding a rebellion. Soldiers walked the
streets, and a sizable contingent had set up camp just outside the
Ministry building. Sazed was worried that the Citizen had associated
Breeze and Sazed with Spook's appearance at the executions. It
appeared that their days of moving about freely in the city were at
an end.
"Why hasn't he
come back?" Allrianne asked. She and Breeze sat at a fine table,
pilfered from an empty nobleman's mansion. They had, of course,
changed back to their fine clothing—a suit on Breeze, a peach
dress on Allrianne. They always changed as soon as possible, as if
eager to reaffirm to themselves who they really were.
Sazed did not dine
with them; he didn't have much of an appetite. Captain Goradel leaned
against a bookcase a short distance away, determined to keep a close
eye on his charges. Though the good-natured man wore his usual smile,
Sazed could tell from the orders he'd given to his soldiers that he
was worried about the possibility of an assault. He made very certain
that Breeze, Allrianne, and Sazed stayed within the protective
confines of the cavern. Better to be trapped than dead.
"I'm sure the
boy is fine, my dear," Breeze said, finally answering
Allrianne's question. "It's likely he hasn't come back because
he fears implicating us in what he did today."
"Either that,"
Sazed said, "or he can't get past the soldiers watching
outside."
"He snuck into
a burning building while we were watching, my dear man," Breeze
said, "I doubt he'd have trouble with a bunch of toughs,
especially now that it's dark out."
Allrianne shook her
head. "It would have been better if he'd managed to sneak out
of that building as well, rather than jumping off the roof in front
of everyone."
"Perhaps,"
Breeze said. "But, part of being a vigilante rebel is letting
your enemies know what you are about. The psychological effect
produced by leaping from a burning building carrying a child is quite
sound. And, to do that right in front of the tyrant who tried to
execute said child? I wasn't aware that dear little Spook had such a
flair for drama!"
"He's not so
little anymore, I think," Sazed said quietly. "We have a
habit of ignoring Spook too much."
"Habits come
from reinforcement, my dear man," Breeze said, wagging a fork at
Sazed. "We paid little attention to the lad because he rarely
had an important role to play. It isn't his fault—he was simply
young."
"Vin was young
as well," Sazed noted.
"Vin, you must
admit, is something of a special case."
Sazed couldn't
argue with that.
"Either way,"
Breeze said, "when we look at the facts, what happened isn't
really all that surprising. Spook has had months to become known to
Urteau's underground population, and he is of the Survivor's own
crew. It is logical that they would begin to look to him to save
them, much as Kelsier saved Luthadel."
"We're
forgetting one thing, Lord Breeze," Sazed said. "He jumped
from a rooftop ledge two stories up and landed on a cobbled street.
Men do not survive falls like that without broken bones."
Breeze paused.
"Staged, you think? Perhaps he worked out some kind of landing
platform to soften the fall?"
Sazed shook his
head. "I believe it a stretch to assume that Spook could plan,
and execute, a staged rescue like that. He would have needed the aid
of the underground, which would have ruined the effect. If they knew
that his survival was a trick, then we wouldn't have heard the rumors
we did about him."
"What, then?"
Breeze asked, shooting a glance at Allrianne. "You're not truly
suggesting that Spook has been Mistborn all this time, are
you?"
"I do not
know," Sazed said softly.
Breeze shook his
head, chuckling. "I doubt he could have hidden that from us, my
dear man. Why, he would have had to go through that entire mess of
overthrowing the Lord Ruler, then the fall of Luthadel, without ever
revealing that he was anything more than a Tineye! I refuse to accept
that."
Or, Sazed
thought, you refuse to accept that you wouldn't have detected the
truth. Still, Breeze had a point. Sazed had known Spook as a
youth. The boy had been awkward and shy, but he hadn't been
deceitful. It was truly a stretch to imagine him to have been a
Mistborn from the beginning.
Yet, Sazed had seen
that fall. He had seen the grace of the jump, the distinctive poise
and natural dexterity of one burning pewter. Sazed found himself
wishing for his copperminds so that he could search for references
about people spontaneously manifesting Allomantic powers. Could a man
be a Misting early in life, then transform to a full Mistborn later?
It was a simple
thing, related to his duties as an ambassador. Perhaps he could spend
just a little time looking through his stored memories, seeking
examples. . . .
He paused. Don't
be silly, he thought. You're just looking for excuses. You
know that it's impossible for an Allomancer to gain new powers.
You won't find any examples because there aren't any.
He didn't need to
look through his metalminds. He had set those aside for a very good
reason—he could not be a Keeper, could not share the knowledge
he'd collected, until he could sort the truth from the lies.
I've let myself
get distracted lately, he thought with determination, rising
from his place and leaving the others behind. He walked over to his
"room" in the cache, with the sheets hung there cutting off
his view of the others. Sitting on the table was his portfolio. In
the corner, next to a shelf full of cans, sat his sack full of
metalminds.
No, Sazed thought.
I made a promise to myself. I will keep it. I will not allow
myself to become a hypocrite simply because some new religion appears
and waves at me. I will be strong.
He sat down at the
table, opening his portfolio, taking out the next sheet in the line.
It listed the tenets of the Nelazan people, who had worshipped the
god Trell. Sazed had always been partial to this religion because of
its focus on learning and study of mathematics and the heavens. He'd
saved it for near the end, but had done so more out of worry than
anything else. He'd wanted to put off what he'd known would happen.
Sure enough, as he
read about the religion, he saw the holes in its doctrines. True, the
Nelazan had known a great deal about astronomy, but their teachings
on the afterlife were sketchy—almost whimsical. Their doctrine
was purposefully vague, they'd taught, allowing all men to discover
truth for themselves. Reading this, however, left Sazed frustrated.
What good was a religion without answers? Why believe in something if
the response to half of his questions was "Ask Trell, and he
will answer"?
He didn't dismiss
the religion immediately. He forced himself to put it aside,
acknowledging to himself that he wasn't in the right mood for
studying. He didn't feel like he was in the mood for much, actually.
What if Spook
really has become Mistborn? he wondered, mind getting drawn back
to the previous conversation. It seemed impossible. Yet, a lot of
things they thought they'd known about Allomancy—such as the
existence of only ten metals—had turned out to be falsehoods
taught by the Lord Ruler to hide some powerful secrets.
Perhaps it was
possible for an Allomancer to spontaneously manifest new powers. Or,
perhaps there was a more mundane reason Spook had managed such a long
fall. It could be related to the thing that made Spook's eyes so
sensitive. Drugs, perhaps?
Either way, Sazed's
worry about what was happening kept him from being able to focus on
studying the Nelazan religion as he should. He kept getting the
feeling that something very important was occurring. And Spook was at
the center of it.
Where was that boy?
"I know why
you're so sad," Spook said.
Beldre turned,
shock showing on her face. She didn't see him at first. He must have
been too deep in the misty shadows. It was growing hard for him to
tell.
He stepped forward,
moving across the plot of land that had once been a garden outside
the Citizen's home. "I figured it out," Spook said. "At
first, I thought that sadness had to do with this garden. It must
have been beautiful, once. You would have seen it in its fullness,
before your brother ordered all gardens plowed under. You were
related to nobility, and probably lived in their society."
She looked
surprised at this.
"Yes, I know,"
Spook said. "Your brother is an Allomancer. He's a Coinshot; I
felt his Pushes. That day at Marketpit."
She remained
silent—more beautiful herself than the garden could ever have
been—though she did take a step backward as her eyes finally
found him in the mists.
"Eventually,"
Spook continued, "I decided that I must be wrong. Nobody mourns
so much for a simple garden, no matter how lovely. After that, I
thought the sadness in your eyes must come from being forbidden to
take part in your brother's councils. He always sends you out, into
the garden, when he meets with his most important officials. I know
what it's like to feel useless and excluded among important people."
He took another
step forward. The rough earth lay torn beneath his feet, covered by
an inch of ash, the dreary remnants of what had once been fertile
ground. To his right stood the lone shrub that Beldre often came to
gaze at. He didn't look toward it; he kept his eyes on her.
"I was wrong,"
he said. "Being forbidden your brother's conferences would lead
to frustration, but not such pain. Not such regret. I know that
sorrow now. I killed for the first time this afternoon. I helped
overthrow empires, then helped build them anew. And I'd never killed
a man. Not until today."
He stopped, then
looked into her eyes. "Yes, I know that sorrow. What I'm trying
figure out is why you feel it."
She turned away.
"You shouldn't be here," she said. "There are guards
watching—"
"No,"
Spook said. "Not anymore. Quellion sent too many men into the
city—he's afraid that he'll suffer a revolution, like happened
in Luthadel. Like he himself inspired here when he seized power. He's
right to be afraid, but he was wrong to leave his own palace so
poorly guarded."
"Kill him,"
Kelsier whispered. "Quellion is inside; this is the perfect
chance. He deserves it, you know he does."
No, Spook
thought. Not today. Not in front of her.
Beldre glanced back
at him, her eyes growing hard. "Why have you come? To taunt me?"
"To tell you
that I understand," Spook said.
"How can you
say that?" she said. "You don't understand me—you
don't know me."
"I think I
do," Spook said. "I saw your eyes today, when you watched
those people being marched to their deaths. You feel guilty. Guilty
for your brother's murders. You sorrow because you feel you should be
able to stop him." He took a step forward. "You can't,
Beldre. He's been corrupted by his power. He might once have been a
good man, but no longer. Do you realize what he's doing? Your brother
is murdering people simply to get Allomancers. He captures them, then
threatens to kill their families unless they do as he asks. Are those
the actions of a good man?"
"You are a
simplistic fool," Beldre whispered, though she wouldn't meet his
eyes.
"I know,"
Spook said. "What are a few deaths when it comes to securing the
stability of a kingdom?" He paused, then shook his head. "He's
killing children, Beldre. And he's doing it simply to cover up the
fact that he's gathering Allomancers."
Beldre was silent
for a moment. "Go," she finally said.
"I want you to
come with me."
She looked up.
"I'm going to
overthrow your brother," Spook said. "I am a member of the
Survivor's own crew. We took down the Lord Ruler—Quellion will
hardly provide us with a challenge. You don't have to be here when he
falls."
Beldre snorted
quietly in derision.
"It's not just
about your safety," Spook said. "If you join with us, it
will be a strong blow to your brother. Perhaps it will convince him
that he is wrong. There could be a more peaceful way of making this
happen."
"I'm going to
start screaming in three heartbeats," Beldre said.
"I don't fear
your guards," Spook said.
"I don't doubt
that," Beldre said. "But if they come, you'll have to kill
again."
Spook wavered. He
stayed where he was, however, calling her bluff.
And so she started
screaming.
"Go kill him!"
Kelsier said over her screams. "Now, before it's too late! Those
guards you killed—they were just following orders. Quellion,
he's the true monster."
Spook ground his
teeth in frustration, then finally ran, fleeing from Beldre and her
screams, leaving Quellion alive.
For the moment.
The group of rings,
clasps, ear loops, bracelets, and other bits of metal gleamed on the
table like a treasure hoard of legend. Of course, most of the metals
were rather mundane. Iron, steel, tin, copper. No gold or atium.
Yet, to a
Feruchemist, the metals were worth far more than their economic
value. They were batteries, stores that could be filled, then drawn
upon. One made of pewter, for instance, could be filled with
strength. Filling it would drain the Feruchemist of strength for a
time—making him weak enough that simple tasks grew
difficult—but the price was worthwhile. For, when necessary, he
could draw that strength forth.
Many of these
metalminds, spread out on the table in front of Sazed, were empty at
the moment. Sazed had last used them during the horrific battle that
had ended with the fall—then rescue—of Luthadel over a
year before. That battle had left him drained in more ways than one.
Ten rings, lined up on the side of the table, had been used to nearly
kill him. Marsh had shot them at Sazed like coins, piercing his skin.
That, however, had allowed Sazed to draw forth their power and heal
himself.
At the very center
of the collection were the most important metalminds of all. Four
bracers—meant to clasp on to the upper or lower arms—sat
gleaming and polished, made of the purest copper. They were the
largest of his metalminds, for they held the most. Copper carried
memories. A Feruchemist could take images, thoughts, or sounds that
were fresh in his mind, then store them away. While inside, they
wouldn't decay or change, as memories could while held in the mind.
When Sazed had been
a young man, an older Feruchemist had read out the entire contents of
his copperminds. Sazed had stored the knowledge in his own
copperminds; they contained the sum total of Keeper knowledge. The
Lord Ruler had worked hard to smother people's memories of the past.
But the Keepers had gathered them—stories of how the world had
been before the ash came and the sun had turned red. The Keepers had
memorized the names of places and of kingdoms, had gathered the
wisdom of those who were lost.
And they had
memorized the religions that had been forbidden by the Lord Ruler.
These he had worked the most diligently to destroy, and so the
Keepers had worked with equal diligence to rescue them—to
secure them away inside of metalminds, so someday they could be
taught again. Above all, the Keepers had searched for one thing:
knowledge of their own religion, the beliefs of the Terris people.
Those had been forgotten during the destructive chaos following the
Lord Ruler's ascension. However, despite centuries of work, the
Keepers had never recovered this most precious knowledge of all.
I wonder what
would have happened if we had found it, Sazed thought,
picking up a steelmind and quietly polishing it. Probably
nothing. He'd given up on his work with the religions in his
portfolio for the moment, feeling too discouraged to study.
There were fifty
religions left in his portfolio. Why was he deluding himself, hoping
to find any more truth in them than he had in the previous two
hundred and fifty? None of the religions had managed to survive the
years. Shouldn't he just let them be? Looking through them seemed to
be part of the great fallacy in the work of the Keepers. They'd
struggled to remember the beliefs of men, but those beliefs had
already proven they lacked the resilience to survive. Why bring them
back to life? That seemed as pointless as reviving a sickly animal so
it could fall to predators again.
He continued to
polish. Out of the corner of his eye, he saw Breeze watching him. The
Soother had come to Sazed's "room," complaining that he
couldn't sleep, not with Spook still outside somewhere. Sazed had
nodded, but continued polishing. He didn't wish to get into a
conversation; he just wanted to be alone.
Breeze,
unfortunately, stood and came over. "Sometimes, I don't
understand you, Sazed," Breeze said.
"I do not
endeavor to be mysterious, Lord Breeze," Sazed said, moving on
to polish a small bronze ring.
"Why take such
good care of them?" Breeze asked. "You never wear them
anymore. In fact, you seem to spurn them."
"I do not
spurn the metalminds, Lord Breeze. They are, in a way, the only
sacred thing I have left in my life."
"But you don't
wear them, either."
Sazed continued
polishing. "No. I do not."
"But why?"
Breeze asked. "You think that she would have wanted this? She
was a Keeper too—do you honestly think she'd want you to give
up your metalminds?"
"This
particular habit of mine is not about Tindwyl."
"Oh?"
Breeze asked, sighing as he seated himself at the table. "What
do you mean? Because honestly, Sazed, you're confusing me. I
understand people. It bothers me that I can't understand you."
"After the
Lord Ruler's death," Sazed said, putting down the ring, "do
you know what I spent my time doing?"
"Teaching,"
Breeze said. "You left to go and restore the lost knowledge to
the people of the Final Empire."
"And did I
ever tell you how that teaching went?"
Breeze shook his
head.
"Poorly,"
Sazed said, picking up another ring. "The people didn't really
care. They weren't interested in the religions of the past. And why
should they have been? Why worship something that people used
to believe in?"
"People are
always interested in the past, Sazed."
"Interested,
perhaps," Sazed said, "but interest is not faith. These
metalminds, they are a thing of museums and old libraries. They are
of little use to modern people. During the years of the Lord Ruler's
reign, we Keepers pretended that we were doing vital work. We
believed that we were doing vital work. And yet, in the end,
nothing we did had any real value. Vin didn't need this knowledge to
kill the Lord Ruler.
"I am probably
the last of the Keepers. The thoughts in these metalminds will die
with me. And, at times, I can't make myself regret that fact. This is
not an era for scholars and philosophers. Scholars and philosophers
do not help feed starving children."
"And so you
don't wear them anymore?" Breeze said. "Because you think
they're useless?"
"More than
that," Sazed said. "To wear these metalminds would be to
pretend. I would be pretending that I find the things in them to be
of use, and I have not yet decided if I do or not. To wear them now
would seem like a betrayal. I set them aside, for I can do them no
justice. I'm just not ready to believe, as we did before, that
gathering knowledge and religions is more important than taking
action. Perhaps if the Keepers had fought, rather than just
memorized, the Lord Ruler would have fallen centuries ago."
"But you
resisted, Sazed," Breeze said. "You fought."
"I don't
represent myself any longer, Lord Breeze," Sazed said softly. "I
represent all Keepers, since I am apparently the last. And I, as the
last, do not believe in the things I once taught. I cannot with good
conscience imply that I am the Keeper I once was."
Breeze sighed,
shaking his head. "You don't make sense."
"It makes
sense to me."
"No, I think
you're just confused. This may not seem to you like a world for
scholars, my dear friend, but I think you'll be proven wrong. It
seems to me that now—suffering in the darkness that might just
be the end of everything—is when we need knowledge the most."
"Why?"
Sazed said. "So I can teach a dying man a religion that I don't
believe? To speak of a god, when I know there is no such being?"
Breeze leaned
forward. "Do you really believe that? That nothing is watching
over us?"
Sazed sat quietly,
slowing in his polishing. "I have yet to decide for certain,"
he finally said. "At times, I have hoped to find some truth.
However, today, that hope seems very distant to me. There is a
darkness upon this land, Breeze, and I am not sure that we can fight
it. I am not sure that I want to fight it."
Breeze looked
troubled at that. He opened his mouth, but before he could respond, a
rumble rolled through the cavern. The rings and bracers on the table
quivered and clinked together as the entire room shook, and there was
a clatter as some foodstuffs fell—though not too many, for
Captain Goradel's men had done good work in moving most of the
stockpile off of shelves and to the ground, in order to deal with the
quakes.
Eventually, the
shaking subsided. Breeze sat with a white face, looking up at the
ceiling of the cavern. "I tell you, Sazed," he said. "Every
time one of those quakes comes, I wonder at the wisdom of hiding in a
cave. Not the safest place during an earthquake, I should think."
"We really
have no other option at the moment," Sazed said.
"True, I
suppose. Do . . . does it seem to you like those quakes are coming
more frequently?"
"Yes,"
Sazed said, picking up a few fallen bracelets from the floor. "Yes,
they are."
"Maybe . . .
this region is just more prone to them," Breeze said, not
sounding convinced. He turned, looking to the side as Captain Goradel
rounded a shelf and approached them in a rush.
"Ah, come to
check on us, I see," Breeze said. "We survived the quake
quite handily. No need for urgency, my dear captain."
"It's not
that," Goradel said, puffing slightly. "It's Lord Spook.
He's back."
Sazed and Breeze
shared a look, then rose from their chairs, following Goradel to the
front of the cavern. They found Spook walking down the steps. His
eyes were uncovered, and Sazed saw a new hardness in the young man's
expression.
We really
haven't been paying enough attention to the lad.
The soldiers backed
away. There was blood on Spook's clothing, though he didn't appear
wounded. His cloak was burned in places, and the bottom ended in a
charred rip.
"Good,"
Spook said, noticing Breeze and Sazed, "you're here. Did that
quake cause any damage?"
"Spook?"
Breeze asked. "No, we're all fine here. No damage. But—"
"We have
little time for chatter, Breeze," Spook said, walking past them.
"Emperor Venture wants Urteau, and we're going to deliver it to
him. I need you to start spreading rumors in the city. It should be
easy—some of the more important elements in the underworld
already know the truth."
"What truth?"
Breeze asked, joining Sazed as they followed Spook through the
cavern.
"That Quellion
is using Allomancers," Spook said, his voice echoing in the
cavern. "I've now confirmed what I suspected before—Quellion
recruits Mistings from the people he arrests. He rescues them from
his own fires, then holds their families hostage. He relies on the
very thing he's preaching against. The entire foundation for his
rule, therefore, is a lie. Exposing that lie should cause the entire
system to collapse."
"That's
capital, we can certainly do that . . ." Breeze said, glancing
at Sazed again. Spook kept walking, and Sazed followed, trailing
Spook as he moved through the cavern. Breeze moved away, probably to
fetch Allrianne.
Spook stopped
beside the water's edge. He stood there for a moment, then turned
toward Sazed. "You said that you have been studying the
construction that brought the water down here, diverting it from the
canals."
"Yes,"
Sazed said.
"Is there a
way to reverse the process?" Spook asked. "Make the water
flood the streets again?"
"Perhaps,"
Sazed said. "I am not certain that I have the engineering
expertise to accomplish the feat, however."
"Is there
knowledge in your metalminds that would help you?" Spook asked.
"Well . . .
yes."
"Then use
them," Spook said.
Sazed paused,
looking uncomfortable.
"Sazed,"
Spook said. "We don't have much time—we have to take this
city before Quellion decides to attack and destroy us. Breeze is
going to spread the rumors, then I am going to find a way to expose
Quellion as a liar before his people. He's an Allomancer himself."
"Will that be
enough?"
"It will if we
give them someone else to follow," Spook said, turning back to
look across the waters. "Someone who can survive fires; someone
who can restore water to the city streets. We'll give them miracles
and a hero, then expose their leader as a hypocrite and a tyrant.
Confronted with that, what would you do?"
Sazed didn't
respond immediately. Spook made good points, even about Sazed's
metalminds still being useful. Yet Sazed wasn't certain what he
thought of the changes in the young man. Spook seemed to have grown
far more competent, but . . .
"Spook,"
Sazed said, stepping in closer, speaking quietly enough that the
soldiers standing behind couldn't hear. "What is it you aren't
sharing with us? How did you survive the leap from that building? Why
do you cover your eyes with cloth?"
"I . . ."
Spook faltered, showing a hint of the insecure boy he had once been.
For some reason, seeing that made Sazed more comfortable. "I
don't know if I can explain, Saze," Spook said, some of his
pretension evaporating. "I'm still trying to figure it out
myself. I'll explain eventually. For now, can you just trust me?"
The lad had always
been a sincere one. Sazed searched those eyes, so eager.
And found something
important. Spook cared. He cared about this city, about overthrowing
the Citizen. He'd saved those people earlier, when Sazed and Breeze
had just stood outside, watching.
Spook cared, and
Sazed did not. Sazed tried—he grew frustrated with himself
because of his depression, which had been worse this evening than it
usually was.
His emotions had
been so traitorous lately. He had trouble studying, had trouble
leading, had trouble being of any use whatsoever. But, looking into
Spook's eager eyes, he was almost able to forget his troubles for a
moment.
If the lad wanted
to take the lead, then who was Sazed to argue?
He glanced toward
his room, where the metalminds lay. He had gone so long without them.
They tempted him with their knowledge.
As long as I
don't preach the religions they contain, he thought, I'm not
a hypocrite. Using this specific knowledge Spook requests will, at
least, bring some small meaning to the suffering of those who worked
to gather knowledge of engineering.
It seemed a weak
excuse. But, in the face of Spook taking the lead and offering a good
reason to use the metalminds, it was enough.
"Very well,"
Sazed said. "I shall do as you request."

Ruin's prison
was not like those that hold men. He wasn't bound by bars. In fact,
he could move about freely.
His prison,
rather, was one of impotence. In the terms of forces and gods, this
meant balance. If Ruin were to push, the prison would push back,
essentially rendering Ruin powerless. And because much of his power
was stripped away and hidden, he was unable to affect the world in
any but the most subtle of ways.
I should stop
here and clarify something. We speak of Ruin being "freed"
from his prison. But that is misleading. Releasing the power at the
Well tipped the aforementioned balance back toward Ruin, but he was
still too weak to destroy the world in the blink of an eye as he
yearned to do. This weakness was caused by part of Ruin's power—his
very body—having been taken and hidden from him.
Which was why
Ruin became so obsessed with finding the hidden part of his self.





47
ELEND STOOD
IN THE MISTS.
Once, he had found
them disconcerting. They had been the unknown—something
mysterious and uninviting, something that belonged to Allomancers and
not to ordinary men.
Yet, now he was an
Allomancer himself. He stared up at the shifting, swirling, spinning
banks of vapor. Rivers in the sky. He almost felt as if he should get
pulled along in some phantom current. When he'd first displayed
Allomantic powers, Vin had explained Kelsier's now-infamous motto.
The mists are our friend. They hide us. Protect us. Give us
power.
Elend continued to
stare upward. It had been three days since Vin's capture.
I shouldn't
have let her go, he thought again, heart twisting within him. I
shouldn't have agreed to such a risky plan.
Vin had always been
the one to protect him. What did they do now, when she was in danger?
Elend felt so inadequate. Had their situations been reversed, Vin
would have found a way to get into the city and rescue him. She'd
have assassinated Yomen, would have done something.
And yet, Elend
didn't have her flair of brash determination. He was too much of a
planner and was too well acquainted with politics. He couldn't
risk himself to save her. He'd already put himself into danger once,
and in so doing, had risked the fate of his entire army. He couldn't
leave them behind again and put himself in danger, particularly not
by going into Fadrex, where Yomen had already proven himself a
skilled manipulator.
No further word had
come from Yomen. Elend expected ransom demands, and was terrified of
what he might have to do if they came. Could he trade the fate of the
world for Vin's life? No. Vin had faced a similar decision at the
Well of Ascension, and had chosen the right option. Elend had to
follow her example, had to be strong.
Yet the thought of
her captured came close to paralyzing him with dread. Only the
spinning mists seemed to somehow comfort him.
She'll be all
right, he told himself, not for the first time. She's Vin.
She'll figure a way out of it. She'll be all right. . . .
It felt odd, to
Elend, that after a lifetime of finding the mists unsettling he would
now find them so comforting. Vin didn't see them that way, not
anymore. Elend could sense it in the way she acted, in the words she
spoke. She distrusted the mists. Hated them, even. And Elend couldn't
really blame her. They had, after all, changed somehow—bringing
destruction and death.
Yet, Elend found it
hard to distrust the mists. They just felt right. How could
they be his enemy? They spun, swirling around him just slightly as he
burned metals, like leaves spinning in a playful wind. As he stood
there, they seemed to soothe away his concerns about Vin's captivity,
giving him confidence that she would find a way out.
He sighed, shaking
his head. Who was he to trust his own instincts about the mists over
Vin's? She had the instincts born of a lifetime of struggling to
survive. What did Elend have? Instincts born of a lifetime of
partygoing and dancing?
Sound came from
behind him. People walking. Elend turned, eyeing a pair of servants
carrying Cett in his chair.
"That damn
Thug isn't around here, is he?" Cett asked as the servants set
him down.
Elend shook his
head as Cett waved the servants away. "No," Elend said.
"He's investigating some kind of disturbance in the ranks."
"What happened
this time?" Cett asked.
"Fistfight,"
Elend said, turning away, looking back toward Fadrex City's watch
fires.
"The men are
restless," Cett said. "They're a little like koloss, you
know. Leave them too long, and they'll get themselves into trouble."
Koloss are like
them, actually, Elend thought. We should have seen it
earlier. They are men—just men reduced to their most base
emotions.
Cett sat quietly in
the mists for a time, and Elend continued his contemplations.
Eventually, Cett
spoke, his voice uncharacteristically soft. "She's as good as
dead, son. You know that."
"No, I don't,"
Elend said.
"She's not
invincible," Cett said. "She's a damn good Allomancer,
true. But, take her metals away . . ."
She'll surprise
you, Cett.
"You don't
even look worried," Cett said.
"Of course I'm
worried," Elend said, growing more certain. "I just . . .
well, I trust her. If anyone can get out, Vin will."
"You're in
denial," Cett said.
"Perhaps,"
Elend admitted.
"Are we going
to attack?" Cett asked. "Try and get her back?"
"This is a
siege, Cett," Elend said. "The point is to not
attack."
"And our
supplies?" Cett asked. "Demoux had to put the soldiers on
half rations today. We'll be lucky not to starve ourselves before we
can get Yomen to surrender."
"We have time
yet," Elend said.
"Not much. Not
with Luthadel in revolt." Cett was silent for a moment, then
continued. "Another of my raiding parties returned today. They
had the same things to report."
The same news as
all the others. Elend had authorized Cett to send soldiers into
nearby villages, to scare the people, perhaps pillage some supplies.
Yet, each of the raiding groups had come back empty-handed, bearing
the same story.
The people in
Yomen's kingdom were starving. Villages barely survived. The soldiers
hadn't the heart to hurt them any further, and there wasn't anything
to take, anyway.
Elend turned toward
Cett. "You think me a bad leader, don't you?"
Cett looked up,
then scratched at his beard. "Yes," he admitted. "But,
well . . . Elend, you've got one thing going for you as a king that I
never did."
"And that is?"
Cett shrugged. "The
people like you. Your soldiers trust you, and they know you have too
good a heart for your own good. You have a strange effect on them.
Lads like those, they should have been eager to rob villages, even
poor ones. Especially considering how on-edge our men are and how
many fights there have been in camp. And yet, they didn't. Hell, one
of the groups felt so sorry for the villagers that they stayed for a
few days and helped water the fields and do repairs to some of the
homes!"
Cett sighed,
shaking his head. "A few years ago, I would have laughed at
anyone who chose loyalty as a basis for rule. But, well . . . with
the world falling apart as it is, I think even I would
rather have someone to trust, as opposed to someone to fear. I guess
that's why the soldiers act as they do."
Elend nodded.
"I thought a
siege was a good idea," Cett said. "But, I don't think it
will work anymore, son. The ash is falling too hard now, and we don't
have supplies. This whole thing is becoming a damn mess. We need to
strike and take what we can from Fadrex, then retreat to Luthadel and
try to hold it through the summer while our people grow crops."
Elend fell silent,
then turned, looking to the side as he heard something else in the
mists. Shouting and cursing. It was faint—Cett probably
couldn't hear it. Elend left, hurrying toward the sound, leaving Cett
behind.
Another fight,
Elend realized as he approached one of the cooking fires. He
heard yells, blustering, and the sounds of men brawling. Cett's
right. Goodhearted or not, our men are getting too restless. I need —
"Stop this
immediately!" a new voice called. Just ahead, through the dark
mists, Elend could see figures moving about the firelight. He
recognized the voice; General Demoux had arrived on the scene.
Elend slowed.
Better to let the general deal with the disturbance. There was a big
difference between being disciplined by one's military commander and
one's emperor. The men would be better off if Demoux were the one to
punish them.
The fighting,
however, did not stop.
"Stop this!"
Demoux yelled again, moving into the conflict. A few of the brawlers
listened to him, pulling back. The rest, however, just continued to
fight. Demoux pushed himself into the melee, reaching to pull apart
two of the combatants.
And one of them
punched him. Square in the face, throwing Demoux to the ground.
Elend cursed,
dropping a coin and Pushing himself forward. He fell directly into
the middle of the firelight, Pushing out with a Soothing to dampen
the emotions of those fighting.
"Stop!"
he bellowed.
They did, freezing,
one of the soldiers standing over the fallen General Demoux.
"What is going
on here?" Elend demanded, furious. The soldiers looked down.
"Well?" Elend said, turning toward the man who had punched
Demoux.
"I'm sorry, my
lord," the man grumbled. "We just . . ."
"Speak,
soldier," Elend said, pointing, Soothing the man's emotions,
leaving him compliant and docile.
"Well, my
lord," the man said. "They're cursed, you know. They're the
reason Lady Vin got taken. They were speaking of the Survivor and his
blessings, and that just smacked me as hypocrisy, you know? Then, of
course their leader would show, demanding that we stop. I just .
. . well, I'm tired of listening to them, is all."
Elend frowned in
anger. As he did so, a group of the army's Mistings—Ham at
their head—shoved through the crowd. Ham met Elend's eyes, and
Elend nodded toward the men who had been fighting. Ham made quick
work of them, gathering them up for reprimand. Elend walked over,
pulling Demoux to his feet. The grizzled general looked more shocked
than anything.
"I'm sorry, my
lord," Demoux said quietly. "I should have seen that coming
. . . I should have been ready for it."
Elend just shook
his head. The two of them watched quietly until Ham joined them, his
police pushing the troublemakers away. The rest of the crowd
dispersed, returning to their duties. The solitary bonfire burned
alone in the night, as if shunned as a new symbol of bad luck.
"I recognized
a number of those men," Ham said, joining Elend and Demoux as
the troublemakers were led away. "Mistfallen."
Mistfallen. The men
who, like Demoux, had lain sick from the mists for weeks, instead of
a single day. "This is ridiculous," Elend said.
"So they remained sick awhile longer. That doesn't make them
cursed!"
"You don't
understand superstition, my lord," Demoux said, shaking his head
and rubbing his chin. "The men look for someone to
blame for their ill luck. And . . . well, it's easy to see why they'd
be feeling their luck was bad lately. They've been hard on anyone
who was sickened by the mists; they're just most hard on we who were
out the longest."
"I refuse to
accept such idiocy in my army," Elend said. "Ham, did you
see one of those men strike Demoux?"
"They hit
him?" Ham asked with surprise. "Their general?"
Elend nodded. "The
big man I was talking to. Brill is his name, I think. You know what
will have to be done."
Ham cursed, looking
away.
Demoux looked
uncomfortable. "Maybe we could just . . . throw him in solitary
or something."
"No,"
Elend said through his teeth. "No, we hold to the law. If he'd
struck his captain, maybe we could let him off. But deliberately
striking one of my generals? The man will have to be executed.
Discipline is falling apart as it is."
Ham wouldn't look
at him. "The other fight I had to break up was also between a
group of regular soldiers and a group of mistfallen."
Elend ground his
teeth in frustration. Demoux, however, met his eyes. You know
what needs to be done, he seemed to say.
Being a king
isn't always about doing what you want, Tindwyl had often said.
It's about doing what needs to be done.
"Demoux,"
Elend said. "I think the problems in Luthadel are even more
serious than our difficulties with discipline. Penrod looked toward
us for support. I want you to gather a group of men and take them
back along the canal with the messenger, Conrad. Lend aid to Penrod
and bring the city back under control."
"Yes, my
lord," Demoux said. "How many soldiers should I take?"
Elend met his eyes.
"About three hundred should suffice." It was the number who
were mistfallen. Demoux nodded, then withdrew into the night.
"It's the
right thing to do, El," Ham said softly.
"No, it's
not," Elend said. "Just like it's not right to have to
execute a soldier because of a single lapse in judgment. But, we need
to keep this army together."
"I guess,"
Ham said.
Elend turned,
glancing up through the mists. Toward Fadrex City. "Cett's
right," he finally said. "We can't just continue to sit out
here, not while the world is dying."
"So, what do
we do about it?" Ham asked.
Elend wavered. What
to do about it indeed? Retreat and leave Vin—and probably the
entire empire—to its doom? Attack, causing the deaths of
thousands, becoming the conqueror he feared? Was there no other way
to take the city?
Elend turned and
struck out into the night. He found his way to Noorden's tent, Ham
following curiously. The former obligator was awake, of course.
Noorden kept odd hours. He stood hurriedly as Elend entered his tent,
bowing in respect.
There, on the
table, Elend found what he wanted. The thing he had ordered Noorden
to work on. Maps. Troop movements.
The locations of
koloss bands.
Yomen refuses
to be intimidated by my forces, Elend thought. Well, let's
see if I can turn the odds back against him.

Once "freed,"
Ruin was able to affect the world more directly. The most obvious way
he did this was by making the ashmounts emit more ash and the earth
begin to break apart. As a matter of fact, I believe that much of
Ruin's energy during those last days was dedicated to these tasks.
He was also
able to affect and control far more people than before. Where he had
once influenced only a few select individuals, he could now direct
entire koloss armies.





48
AS DAYS
PASSED IN THE CAVERN, Vin regretted knocking over the
lantern. She tried to salvage it, searching with blind fingers.
However, the oil had spilled. She was locked in darkness.
With a thing that
wanted to destroy the world.
Sometimes she could
sense it, pulsing near her, watching silently—like some
fascinated patron at a carnival show. Other times, it vanished.
Obviously, walls meant nothing to it. The first time it disappeared,
she felt a sense of relief. However, just moments after it vanished,
she heard Reen's voice in her mind. I haven't left you, it said.
I'm always here.
The words chilled
her, and she thought—just briefly—that it had read her
mind. However, she decided that her thoughts would have been easy to
guess. Looking back through her life, she realized that Ruin couldn't
have spoken each and every time she heard Reen's voice in her head. A
lot of the time she heard Reen, it was in response to things she'd
been thinking, rather than things she'd been doing. Since Ruin
couldn't read minds, those comments couldn't have come from it.
Ruin had been
speaking to her for so long, it was difficult to separate her own
memories from its influence. Yet, she had to trust in the Lord
Ruler's promise that Ruin couldn't read her mind. The alternative was
to abandon hope. And she wouldn't do that. Each time Ruin spoke to
her, it gave her clues about its nature. Those clues might give her
the means to defeat it.
Defeat it? Vin
thought, leaning back against a rough stone wall of the cavern. It's
a force of nature, not a man. How could I even think to defeat
something like that?
Time was very
difficult to gauge in the perpetual blackness, but she figured from
her sleep patterns that it had been around three or four days since
her imprisonment.
Everyone called
the Lord Ruler a god, Vin reminded herself. I killed him.
Ruin had been
imprisoned once. That meant that it could be defeated, or at
least bottled up. But, what did it mean to imprison an abstraction—a
force—like Ruin? It had been able to speak to her while
imprisoned. But its words had felt less forceful then. Less . . .
directed. Ruin had acted more as an influence, giving the child Vin
impressions that manifested through memories of Reen. Almost like . .
. it had influenced her emotions. Did that mean it used Allomancy? It
did indeed pulse with Allomantic power.
Zane heard
voices, Vin realized. Right before he died, he seemed to be
talking to something. She felt a chill as she rested her head
back against the wall.
Zane had been mad.
Perhaps there was no connection between the voices he heard and Ruin.
Yet, it seemed like too much of a coincidence. Zane had tried to get
her to go with him, to seek out the source of the pulsings—the
pulsings that had eventually led her to free Ruin.
So, Vin
thought, Ruin can influence me regardless of distance or
containment. However, now that it has been freed, it can manifest
directly. That brings up another question. Why hasn't it already
destroyed us all? Why play games with armies?
The answer to that
one, at least, seemed obvious. She sensed Ruin's boundless will to
destroy. She felt as if she knew its mind. One drive. One impulse.
Ruin. So, if it hadn't accomplished its goal yet, that meant it
couldn't. That it was hindered. Limited to indirect, gradual means of
destruction—like falling ash and the light-stealing mists.
Still, those
methods would eventually be effective. Unless Ruin was
stopped. But how?
It was
imprisoned before . . . but what did the imprisoning? She'd once
assumed that the Lord Ruler had been the one behind Ruin's
imprisonment. But that was wrong. Ruin had already been
imprisoned when the Lord Ruler had traveled to the Well of Ascension.
The Lord Ruler, then known as Rashek, had gone on the quest with
Alendi, in order to slay the presumed Hero of Ages. Rashek's purpose
had been to stop Alendi from doing what Vin had eventually
done: accidentally releasing Ruin.
Ironically, it had
been better that a selfish man like Rashek had taken the
power. For, a selfish man kept the power for himself, rather than
giving it up and freeing Ruin.
Regardless, Ruin
had already been imprisoned before the quest began. That meant that
the Deepness—the mists—weren't related to Ruin. Or, at
least, the connection wasn't as simple as she'd assumed. Letting Ruin
go hadn't been what had prompted the mists to start coming during the
day and killing people. In fact, the daymists had started to appear
as much as a year before she'd released Ruin, and the mists
had started killing people some hours before Vin had found her way to
the Well.
So . . . what
do I know? That Ruin was imprisoned long ago. Imprisoned by something
that, perhaps, I can find and use again?
She stood up. Too
much sitting and thinking had made her restless, and she began to
walk, feeling her way along the wall.
During her first
day of imprisonment she'd begun, by touch, to scout the cavern. It
was huge, like the other caches, and the process had taken her
several days. However, she'd had nothing else to do. Unlike the cache
in Urteau, this one had no pool or source of water. And, as Vin
investigated it, she discovered that Yomen had removed all of the
water barrels from what she assumed was their place on the far right
corner. He'd left the canned food and other supplies—the cavern
was so enormous that he would have had trouble finding time to remove
everything, let alone finding a place to store it somewhere
else—however, he'd taken all of the water.
That left Vin with
a problem. She felt her way along the wall, locating a shelf where
she'd left an open can of stew. Even with pewter and a rock, it had
taken her a frightfully long time to get into the can. Yomen had been
clever enough to remove the tools she could have used for opening the
food stores, and Vin only had one vial's worth of pewter remaining.
She'd opened some ten cans of food on her first day, burning away
what pewter she'd had inside of her. That food was already dwindling,
however, and she was feeling the need for water—the stew did
little to quench her thirst.
She picked up the
can of stew, carefully eating only a mouthful. It was almost gone.
The taste reminded her of the hunger that was a growing complement to
her thirst. She pushed the feeling away. She'd dealt with hunger for
her entire childhood. It was nothing new, even if it had been years
since she'd last felt it.
She moved on,
trailing fingers on the side of the wall to keep her bearings. It
seemed like such a clever way to kill a Mistborn. Yomen couldn't
defeat her, and he trapped her instead. Now, he could simply wait for
her to die of dehydration. Simple, effective.
Perhaps Ruin is
speaking to Yomen, too, she thought. My imprisonment could
all be part of Ruin's plan.
Whatever that
is.
Why had Ruin chosen
her? Why not lead someone else to the Well of Ascension? Someone
easier to control? She could understand why Ruin had chosen Alendi,
all those years before. During Alendi's time, the Well had been
sequestered high in the mountains. It would have been a very
difficult trek, and Ruin would have needed just the right person to
plan, then survive, the expedition.
However, during
Vin's day, the Well had somehow been moved to Luthadel. Or, perhaps
Luthadel had been built on top of the Well. Either way, it was there,
right beneath the Lord Ruler's palace. Why had Ruin waited so long to
free himself? And, of all the people he could have chosen as his
pawn, why Vin?
She shook her head
as she arrived at her destination—the only other thing of
interest in the vast cavern. A metal plate on the wall. She reached
up, brushing her fingers across the slick steel. She'd never been an
excellent reader, and the last year—spent in war and
travel—hadn't afforded her much time to improve her abilities.
And so, it had taken her some time, feeling her way across each
groove carved into the metal, to figure out what was written on the
plate.
There was no map.
Or, at least, not like the ones in the previous storage caverns.
Instead, there was a simple circle, with a dot at the center. Vin
wasn't certain what it was supposed to mean. The text was equally
frustrating. Vin ran her fingers across the grooves, though she had
long since memorized what the words said.
I have failed
you.
I have planned
these caverns, knowing a calamity is coming, hoping that I might find
some secret that might be of use should I fall to the thing's
scheming. Yet, I have nothing. I do not know how to defeat it. The
only thing I can think of is to keep it at bay by taking the power at
the Well for myself when it returns.
However, if you
are reading this, I have failed. That means I am dead. As I write
this, I find that prospect to be less tragic than I might previously
have assumed. I would rather not deal with the thing. It has been my
constant companion, the voice that whispers to me always, telling me
to destroy, begging me to give it freedom.
I fear that it
has corrupted my thoughts. It cannot sense what I think, but it can
speak inside of my head. Eight hundred years of this has made it
difficult to trust my own mind. Sometimes, I hear the voices, and
simply assume that I am mad.
That would
certainly be preferable.
I do know that
these words must be written in steel to be preserved. I have written
them in a steel sheet, then ordered them scribed into a plate,
knowing that in doing so, I reveal my weakness to my own priests. The
thing has whispered to me that I am a fool to expose myself by
writing this and letting others see it.
That is
primarily why I decided to go through with the creation of this
plate. Doing so seemed to make the thing angry. That is reason
enough, I think. It is good that some few of my loyal priests know of
my weakness, if only for the good of the empire, should I somehow
fall.
I have tried to
be a good ruler. At first, I was too young, too angry. I made
mistakes. Yet, I have tried so hard. I nearly destroyed the world
with my arrogance, and yet I fear I have nearly destroyed it again
through my rule. I can do better. I will do better. I will create a
land of order.
The thoughts in
my mind, however, make me wonder just how much of what I do has been
twisted from my original intentions. At times, my empire seems a
place of peace and justice. Yet, if that is so, why can I not stop
the rebellions? They cannot defeat me, and I must order them
slaughtered each time they rise up. Can they not see the perfection
of my system?
Regardless,
this is not the place for justification. I need no justification, for
I am—after a form—God. Yet, I know there is something
greater than I. If I can be destroyed, It will be the cause of that
destruction.
I have no
advice to give. It is more powerful than I am. It is more powerful
than this world. It claims to have created this world, in fact. It
will destroy us all eventually.
Perhaps these
stores will let mankind survive a little longer. Perhaps not. I am
dead. I doubt that I should care.
Still, I do.
For you are my people. I am the Hero of Ages. That is what it must
mean: Hero of Ages, a hero that lives through the ages, as I do.
Know that the
thing's power is not complete. Fortunately, I have hidden his body
well.
And that was the
end. Vin tapped the plate with frustration. Everything about the
words on it seemed contrived to frustrate her. The Lord Ruler had led
them on this grand chase, then at the end, he offered no hope? Elend
was betting so much on what this plaque would contain, and yet, it
was virtually worthless. At least the other ones had contained some
relevant information about a new metal or the like.
I have failed
you. It was infuriating—almost crushingly so—to come
all this way, then find that the Lord Ruler had been as stumped as
they were. And, if he'd known more—as his words implied that he
did—why hadn't he shared it on the plate? And yet, she
could sense his instability even through these words—his
washing back and forth from contrition to arrogance. Perhaps that was
Ruin's influence on him. Or, perhaps it was simply the way he had
always been. Either way, Vin suspected that the Lord Ruler couldn't
have told her much more that would have been of use. He'd done what
he could, holding Ruin at bay for a thousand years. It had corrupted
him, perhaps even driven him mad.
That didn't stop
her from feeling a sharp sense of disappointment at what the plate
contained. The Lord Ruler had been given a thousand years to worry
about what would happen to the land if he were killed before the
power returned to the Well, and even he hadn't been able to come up
with a way out of the problem.
She looked up
toward the plate, though in the darkness, she could not see it.
There has to be
a way! she thought, refusing to accept the Lord Ruler's
implication that they were doomed. What was it you wrote at the
bottom? "I have hidden his body well."
That part seemed
important. However, she hadn't been—
A sound rung
through the darkness.
Vin turned
immediately, growing tense, feeling for her last metal vial.
Proximity to Ruin had made her jumpy, and she found her heart beating
with anxiety as she listened to the echoing sounds—sounds of
stone grinding against stone.
The door to the
cavern was opening.

One might ask
why Ruin couldn't have used Inquisitors to release him from his
prison. The answer to this is simple enough, if one understands the
workings of power.
Before the Lord
Ruler's death, he maintained too tight a grip on them to let Ruin
control them directly. Even after the Lord Ruler's death, however,
such a servant of Ruin could never have rescued him. The power in the
Well was of Preservation, and an Inquisitor could only have taken it
by first removing his Hemalurgic spikes. That, of course, would have
killed him.
Thus, Ruin
needed a much more indirect way to achieve his purpose. He needed
someone he hadn't tainted too much, but someone he could lead by the
nose, carefully manipulating.





49
SAZED MADE
A SMALL NOTATION ON HIS DIAGRAM, comparing measurements of
the waterway. From what he could tell, the Lord Ruler hadn't really
needed to do much to create the underground lake. Water had already
been flowing into the cavern. The Lord Ruler's engineers had simply
widened the passageways, bringing in a steadier, surer flow that
outpaced the natural drainage.
The result was an
aquifer of good size. Some machinery in a side cave proved to be a
mechanism for plugging the outlets at the bottom—presumably so
that one could keep the water reserve from escaping, should something
happen to the incoming supply. Unfortunately, there was no existing
way to block off the inlets.
Before the Lord
Ruler's creation of the reservoir, only a small amount of the water
had passed into the cavern. The rest flowed instead into what were
now the streets, filling the canals. So, Sazed assumed, if he could
stop the water from entering the cavern, it would refill the canals.
I'll need to
know more about water pressure, Sazed thought, so I can
provide enough weight to plug those inlets. He thought he'd seen
a book on the subject inside his metalmind.
He leaned back in
his chair, tapping his metalmind. Memory blossomed inside his head as
he withdrew a section of text: an index he'd made listing the titles
of books he had in his storage. As soon as he pulled the text out,
the words became as clear to him as if he'd just read and memorized
them. He scanned through the list quickly, seeking the title he
needed. When he found it, he scribbled it on a piece of paper. Then,
he placed the list back inside his coppermind.
The experience was
odd. After replacing the list, he could recollect having drawn the
material out—but, he had no memory whatsoever of what the index
had contained. There was a blank in his mind. Only the words
scribbled on the paper explained things that he'd known just seconds
before. With that title, he could draw the appropriate book into his
mind in its entirety. He selected the chapters he wanted, then stuck
the rest back into the coppermind, lest they decay.
And, with those
chapters, his knowledge of engineering was as fresh as if he'd just
read and studied the book. He easily figured out the proper weights
and balances he'd need to craft barriers that would, he hoped, return
water to the streets above.
He worked alone,
sitting at a fine stolen desk, a lantern lighting the cavern around
him. Even with the knowledge provided by his copperminds, it was
difficult work, with many calculations—not exactly the kind of
research he was accustomed to. Fortunately, a Keeper's copperminds
were not limited to his own interests. Each Keeper kept all of the
knowledge. Sazed could vaguely remember the years he'd spent
listening and memorizing. He'd only needed to know the information
well enough to remember it for a short time, then he could dump it
into a coppermind. In that way, he was both one of the smartest and
most ignorant men who had ever lived—he had memorized so much,
but had intentionally forgotten it all.
Regardless, he had
access to texts on engineering as well as religion. Knowing such
things did not make him a brilliant mathematician or
architect—however, it did give him enough competence to make
him a good deal better than a layman.
And, as he worked,
he was finding it more and more difficult to deny that scholarship
was something at which he excelled. He was not a leader. He was not
an ambassador. Even while he served as Elend's chief ambassador, he'd
spent much of his time looking through his religions. Now, when he
should be heading the team in Urteau, more and more he found himself
letting Spook take the lead.
Sazed was a man of
research and of letters. He found contentment in his studies. Even
though engineering wasn't an area he particularly enjoyed, the truth
was, he'd much rather study—no matter what the topic—than
do anything else. Is it such a shameful thing, he thought,
to be the man who likes to provide information for others, rather
than be the one who has to use that information?
The tapping of a
cane on the ground announced Breeze's arrival. The Soother didn't
need a cane to walk; he just preferred to carry one to look more
gentlemanly. Of all the skaa thieves Sazed had known, Breeze did by
far the best job of imitating a nobleman.
Sazed quickly
jotted down a few more notations, then returned the chapters on water
pressure to his coppermind. No need to let them decay while speaking
to Breeze. For, of course, Breeze would want to talk. Sure enough, as
soon as Breeze sat at Sazed's table, he scanned the diagrams, then
raised an eyebrow. "That's coming along nicely, my dear man. You
may have missed your calling."
Sazed smiled. "You
are kind, Lord Breeze, though I fear an engineer would find this plan
unsightly. Still, I think it will be sufficient."
"You really
think you can do it?" Breeze asked. "Make the waters flow
as the lad asked? Is it even possible?"
"Oh, it is
quite possible," Sazed said. "My expertise—not the
plausibility of the task—is the item in question. The waters
once filled those canals, and they can do so again. In fact, I
believe that their return will be far more spectacular than the
original flow. Before, much of the water was already diverted into
these caverns. I should be able to block most of that and return the
waters above in force. Of course, if Lord Spook wishes to keep the
canals flowing, then we will have to let some of the water escape
down here again. Canal works generally don't have much of a current,
especially in an area where there are many locks."
Breeze raised an
eyebrow.
"Actually,"
Sazed continued, "canals are far more fascinating than you might
expect. Take, for instance, the methods of transforming a natural
river into a canal—making it what is called a navigation—or
perhaps look at the methods of dredging used to remove silt and ash
from the depths. I have one particular book by the infamous Lord
Fedre, who—despite his reputation—was an absolute genius
when it came to canal architecture. Why, I've had to . . ."
Sazed trailed off, then smiled wanly. "I apologize. You're not
interested in this, are you?"
"No,"
Breeze said, "but it's enough that you are, Sazed. It's
good to see you excited about your studies again. I don't know what
it was you were working on before, but it always bothered me that you
wouldn't share it with anyone. Seemed like you were almost ashamed of
what you were doing. Now, however—this is like the Sazed I
remember!"
Sazed looked down
at his scribbled notes and diagrams. It was true. The last time that
he had been so excited about a line of study was . . .
When he'd been with
her. Working on their collection of myths and references regarding
the Hero of Ages.
"In truth,
Lord Breeze," Sazed said, "I do feel somewhat guilty."
Breeze rolled his
eyes. "Sazed. Do you always have to be feeling guilty
about something? Back in the original crew, you felt you weren't
doing enough to help us overthrow the Lord Ruler. Then, once we
killed him, you were distraught because you weren't doing what the
other Keepers told you to. Do you want to tell me exactly how you go
about feeling guilty for studying, of all things?"
"I enjoy it."
"That's
wonderful, my dear man," Breeze said. "Why be ashamed of
that enjoyment? It's not like you enjoy killing puppies or something
like that. True, I think you're a bit crazy, but if you want to enjoy
something so particularly esoteric, then you should feel free. It
leaves more room for those of us who prefer more common delights—such
as getting drunk on Straff Venture's finest wines."
Sazed smiled. He
knew that Breeze was Pushing on his emotions, making him feel better,
but he did not rebel against the emotions. The truth was, he did
feel good. Better than he had in some time.
Though, still . . .
"It is not so
simple, Lord Breeze," Sazed said, setting down his pen. "I
feel happy being able to simply sit and read, without having to be in
charge. That is why I feel guilty."
"Not everybody
is meant to be a leader, Sazed."
"No,"
Sazed said, "but Lord Elend did put me in charge of securing
this city. I should be planning our overthrow of the Citizen, not
letting Lord Spook do it."
"My dear man!"
Breeze said, leaning down. "Have I taught you nothing? Being in
charge isn't about doing anything—it's about making
certain that other people do what they're supposed to! Delegation, my
friend. Without it, we would have to bake our own bread and dig our
own latrines!" Then, Breeze leaned in. "And, trust me. You
don't want to taste anything I've had a hand in baking. Ever.
Particularly after I've cleaned a latrine."
Sazed shook his
head. "This isn't what Tindwyl would have wanted of me. She
respected leaders and politicians."
"Correct me if
you must," Breeze said, "but didn't she fall in love with
you, not some king or prince?"
"Well, love is
perhaps—"
"Come now,
Sazed," Breeze said. "You were mooning about as surely as
any teenage boy with a new fancy. And, while she was a bit more
reserved, she did love you. One didn't have to be a Soother to see
that much."
Sazed sighed,
looking down.
"Is this what
she'd want of you, Sazed?" Breeze said. "To deny who you
are? To become yet another stuffy politician?"
"I do not
know, Lord Breeze," Sazed said softly. "I . . . I don't
have her anymore. And so, perhaps, I can remember her by being
involved in what she loved."
"Sazed,"
Breeze said frankly, "how is it you can be so wise in so many
areas, yet be so completely stupid about this?"
"I . . ."
"A man is
what he has passion about," Breeze said. "I've found that
if you give up what you want most for what you think you
should want more, you'll just end up miserable."
"And if what I
want isn't what society needs?" Sazed said. "Sometimes, we
just have to do what we don't enjoy. That is a simple fact of life, I
think."
Breeze shrugged. "I
don't worry about that. I just do what I'm good at. In my case,
that's making other people do things that I don't want to. It all
fits together, in the end."
Sazed shook his
head. It wasn't that simple, and his depression lately hadn't only
been tied to Tindwyl and her death. He had put off his study of the
religions, but he knew that he would be driven to return to them. The
work with the canals was a welcome distraction, but even so, Sazed
could feel his earlier conclusions and work looming.
He didn't want
to discover that the last religions in the group held no answers.
That was part of why it was so relaxing for him to study something
else, for engineering didn't threaten his worldview. However, he
could not distract himself forever. He would find the answers, or the
lack of answers, eventually. His portfolio sat beneath the desk,
resting against the sack of metalminds.
For now, however,
he allowed himself a reprieve. But even with his concern over the
religions abated for the moment, there were concerns that needed
addressing. He nodded his head in the direction of the lake. Spook,
just barely visible, stood at the edge, speaking with Goradel and
some of the soldiers.
"And what of
him, Lord Breeze?" Sazed asked in a whisper, low enough that
even Spook wouldn't be able to hear. "As I said, Emperor Venture
placed me in charge of this matter. What if I let Spook take control,
and then he fails? I worry that the young man is not . . . seasoned
enough for this task."
Breeze shrugged.
"He seems to be doing well so far. Remember how young Vin was
when she killed the Lord Ruler."
"Yes,"
Sazed whispered, "but this situation is different. Spook seems .
. . odd, lately. He is certainly hiding things from us. Why is he so
determined to take this city?"
"I think it's
good for the boy to show a little determination," Breeze said,
sitting back in his chair. "That lad has been far too passive
for most of his life."
"Do you not
worry about his plan? This could easily collapse around us."
"Sazed,"
Breeze said. "Do you remember our meeting a few weeks back?
Spook asked me why we couldn't just topple Quellion like we did the
Lord Ruler."
"I remember,"
Sazed said. "You told him the reason we couldn't was because we
didn't have Kelsier anymore."
Breeze nodded.
"Well," he said softly, pointing his cane toward Spook, "my
opinion has been revised. We don't have Kelsier, but it's looking
more and more like we have something similar."
Sazed frowned.
"I'm not
saying the lad has Kelsier's force of personality. His . . .
presence. However, you've heard the reputation the boy is gaining
among the people. Kelsier succeeded not because of who he was, but
because of who people thought he was. That's something I
didn't believe we could replicate. I'm starting to think I was
wrong."
Sazed wasn't as
easily convinced. Yet, he kept his reservations to himself as he
turned back to his research. Spook must have noticed them looking
over at him, for a few minutes later he made his way to Sazed's
table. The boy blinked against the lantern-light, soft though it was,
and pulled up a chair. The fine furniture looked odd to Sazed,
contrasted against the rows of dusty, utilitarian shelves.
Spook looked
fatigued. How long has it been since he slept? Sazed
thought. He's still up whenever I bed down, and awake before I
rise.
"Something
doesn't feel right here," Spook said.
"Oh?"
Breeze asked. "Other than the fact that we're chatting beside an
underground lake in a storehouse built by the Lord Ruler underneath
an Inquisitor fortress?"
Spook gave the
Soother a flat look, then glanced at Sazed. "I feel like we
should have been attacked by now."
"What makes
you say that?" Sazed asked.
"I know
Quellion, Saze. The man's a bully after the classical style. He came
to power through force, and he keeps control by giving the people
plenty of alcohol and tiny freedoms, like letting them go to bars at
night. At the same time, however, he keeps everyone on the edge of
fear."
"How did
he take charge, anyway?" Breeze asked. "How did he get
control before some nobleman with a good set of house guards could do
it?"
"Mists,"
Spook said. "He went out in them, and declared that anyone
faithful to the Survivor would be safe in them. Then, the mists
started killing, and gave a handy confirmation of what he'd said. He
made a big deal about the mists killing those who had evil in their
hearts. The people were so worried about what was happening that they
listened to him. He managed to make a law that required everyone to
go out in the mists, so that they could see who died and who didn't.
The ones who survived were—he declared—pure. He told them
they could set up a nice little utopia. After that, they started
killing nobility."
"Ah,"
Breeze said. "Clever."
"Yeah,"
Spook said. "He completely glossed over the fact that the
nobility never got taken by the mists."
"Wait,"
Sazed said. "What?"
Spook shrugged.
"Hard to confirm now, but that's what the stories say. The
nobility seemed immune to the mistsickness. Not skaa who had noble
blood, but actually nobility."
"How odd,"
Breeze noted.
More than odd,
Sazed thought. Downright strange. Does Elend know about this
connection? As Sazed considered it, it seemed unlikely that
Elend did. Their army and allies were all made up of skaa. The only
nobility they knew were those back in Luthadel, and they had all
chosen to stay inside at night, rather than risk going into the
mists.
"Either way,"
Spook said, "Quellion's a bully. And bullies don't like anyone
in their turf who can challenge them. We should have had some kind of
attempt on our lives by now."
"The lad has a
point," Breeze said. "Quellion's type doesn't kill just in
fancy executions. I'd bet that for every person he throws into one of
those buildings, there are three dead in an alley somewhere, slowly
being buried in ash."
"I've told
Goradel and his men to be particularly careful," Spook said,
"and I've prowled our perimeter. However, I haven't caught any
assassins so much as spying on us. Quellion's troops just sit out
there, watching us, but not doing anything."
Breeze rubbed his
chin. "Perhaps Quellion is more afraid of us than you assume."
"Perhaps,"
Spook said, sighing. He rubbed his forehead.
"Lord Spook,"
Sazed said carefully, "you should sleep."
"I'm fine,"
Spook said.
If I didn't
know better, I'd say he was burning pewter to stay awake, Sazed
thought. Or, am I just looking for signs to confirm what I
worried about before?
We never
questioned when Vin or Kelsier manifested powers beyond what even
normal Allomancers were capable of. Why should I be so suspicious of
Spook? Is it simply because I know him too well? Do I focus on my
memories of the boy when he has obviously become a man?
"Anyway,"
Spook said, "how goes the research?"
"Rather well,
actually," Sazed said, turning around several of his diagrams so
that Spook could see them. "I am about ready to begin work on
the actual construction."
"How long will
it take, do you think?"
"A few weeks,
perhaps," Sazed said. "A rather short time, all things
considered. Fortunately, the people who drained the canals left
behind a large amount of rubble, which I can use. In addition, the
Lord Ruler stocked this storehouse quite well. There is timber, as
well as some basic carpentry supplies, and even some pulley
networks."
"What was that
creature preparing for?" Breeze said. "Food and water, I
can understand. But, blankets? Timber? Pulleys?"
"Disaster,
Lord Breeze," Sazed said. "He included everything that a
people would need in the event that the city itself was destroyed. He
even included bedrolls for sleeping and infirmary supplies. Perhaps
he feared koloss rampages."
"No,"
Spook said. "He prepared for exactly what is happening. Now,
you'll be building something to plug the water? I kind of thought
you'd just collapse the tunnels."
"Oh, goodness
no," Sazed said. "We don't have the manpower or equipment
to cause a cave-in. Also, I wouldn't want to do anything that would
risk bringing the cavern down upon us. My plans are to build a wooden
blocking mechanism that can be lowered into the current. Enough
weight, along with the proper framework, should provide reinforcement
to stop the flow. It's actually not unlike the mechanisms used in the
locks of canals."
"Which,"
Breeze added, "he'll be happy to tell you about. At length."
Sazed smiled. "I
do think that—"
He was cut off,
however, as Captain Goradel arrived, looking a fair bit more solemn
than usual.
"Lord Spook,"
Goradel said. "Someone is waiting for you above."
"Who?"
Spook asked. "Durn?"
"No, my lord.
She says she's the Citizen's sister."
"I'm not here
to join with you," the woman—Beldre—said.
They sat in an
austere audience chamber in the Inquisition building above their
cavern. The room's chairs lacked any sort of cushioning, and steel
plates hung on the wooden walls as decoration—to Sazed, they
were uncomfortable reminders of what he had seen when he had visited
the Conventical of Seran.
Beldre was a young
woman with auburn hair. She wore a simple, Citizen-approved dress,
dyed red. She sat with hands in lap, and while she met the eyes of
those in the room, there was a nervous apprehension to her that
weakened her position considerably.
"Why are
you here then, my dear?" Breeze asked carefully. He sat in a
chair across from Beldre. Allrianne sat at his side, watching the
girl with an air of disapproval. Spook paced in the background,
occasionally shooting glances at the window.
He thinks this
is a feint, Sazed realized. That the girl is a distraction
to throw us off before we get attacked. The boy wore his dueling
canes, strapped to his waist like swords. How well did Spook even
know how to fight?
"I'm here . .
." Beldre said, looking down. "I'm here because you're
going to kill my brother."
"Now, where
did you get an idea like that!" Breeze said. "We're in the
city to forge a treaty with your brother, not assassinate him! Do we
look like the types who would be very good at that sort of thing?"
Beldre shot a
glance at Spook.
"Him
excluded," Breeze said. "Spook is harmless. Really, you
shouldn't—"
"Breeze,"
Spook interrupted, glancing over with his strange, bandaged eyes,
spectacles hidden underneath and bulging out from the face just
slightly under the cloth. "That's enough. You're making us both
seem like idiots. Beldre knows why we're here—everyone in the
city knows why we're here."
The room fell
silent.
He . . . looks
a little bit like an Inquisitor, wearing those spectacles beneath the
bandages, Sazed thought, shivering.
"Beldre,"
Spook said. "You honestly expect us to think that you came here
simply to plead for your brother's life?"
She glanced at
Spook, defiantly meeting his eyes—or, rather, his lack thereof.
"You can try to sound harsh, but I know you won't hurt me.
You're of the Survivor's crew."
Spook folded his
arms.
"Please,"
Beldre said. "Quellion is a good man, like you. You have to give
him more time. Don't kill him."
"What makes
you think we'd kill him, child?" Sazed asked. "You just
said that you thought we would never harm you. Why is your brother
different?"
Beldre glanced
down. "You're the ones who killed the Lord Ruler. You overthrew
the entire empire. My brother doesn't believe it—he thinks that
you rode the Survivor's popularity, claiming to be his friends after
he'd sacrificed himself."
Spook snorted. "I
wonder where your brother got an idea like that. Perhaps he knows
someone else who's claimed to have the Survivor's blessing, killing
people in his name . . ."
Beldre blushed.
"Your brother
doesn't trust us," Sazed said. "Why do you?"
Beldre shrugged. "I
don't know," she said quietly. "I guess . . . men who lie
don't save children from burning buildings."
Sazed glanced at
Spook, but couldn't read anything in the young man's hard expression.
Finally, Spook spoke. "Breeze, Sazed, Allrianne, outside with
me. Goradel, watch the woman."
Spook pushed his
way out into the hallway, and Sazed followed with the others. Once
the door was closed, Spook turned to regard the rest of them. "Well?"
"I don't like
her," Allrianne said, folding her arms.
"Of course you
don't, dear," Breeze said. "You never like competition."
"Competition?"
Allrianne huffed. "From a timid little thing like that?
Honestly."
"What do you
think, Breeze?" Spook asked.
"About the
girl, or about you insulting me in there?"
"The first,"
Spook said. "Your pride isn't important right now."
"My dear
fellow," Breeze said, "my pride is always
important. As for the girl, I'll tell you this—she's terrified.
Despite what she says, she's very, very frightened—which means
that she hasn't done this sort of thing very often. My guess is that
she's noble."
Allrianne nodded.
"Definitely. Just look at her hands—when they're not
shaking from fright, you can see that they're clean and soft. She
grew up being pampered."
"She's
obviously a bit naive," Sazed said. "Otherwise she wouldn't
have come here, expecting that we'd just listen to her, then let her
go."
Spook nodded. He
cocked his head, as if listening to something. Then he walked
forward, pushing open the door to the room.
"Well?"
Beldre asked, maintaining her false air of forcefulness. "Have
you decided to listen to me?"
"In a way,"
Spook said. "I'm going to give you more time to explain your
point. Plenty of time, actually."
"I . . . don't
have long," Beldre said. "I need to get back to my brother.
I didn't tell him I was leaving, and . . ." She trailed off,
apparently seeing something in Spook's expression. "You're going
to take me captive, aren't you?"
"Breeze,"
Spook said, turning. "How do you think the people would respond
if I started spreading the rumor that the Citizen's own sister has
turned against him, fleeing to our embassy for protection?"
Breeze smiled.
"Well now. That's clever! Almost makes up for how you treated
me. Have I mentioned yet how rude that was?"
"You can't!"
Beldre said, standing, facing Spook. "Nobody will believe that
I've deserted!"
"Oh?"
Spook asked. "Did you speak to the soldiers outside before you
came in here?"
"Of course
not," Beldre said. "They'd have tried to stop me. I ran up
the steps before they could."
"So, they can
confirm that you entered the building of your own will," Spook
said. "Sneaking around a guard post."
"Doesn't look
good," Breeze agreed.
Beldre wilted
slightly, sitting down in her chair. By the Forgotten Gods,
Sazed thought. She really is naive. The Citizen must
have expended a great deal of effort in sheltering her so.
Of course, from
what Sazed had heard, Quellion rarely let the girl out of his sight.
She was always with him, being watched over. How will he react?
Sazed thought with a chill. What will he do when he learns we
have her? Attack?
Perhaps that was
the plan. If Spook could force an outright attack on the Citizen's
part, it would look bad. Especially bad when Quellion was turned back
by a few soldiers—he couldn't know how well fortified their
position was.
When did Spook
get so clever?
Beldre looked up
from her seat, a few tears of frustration gleaming in her eyes. "You
can't do this. This is deceitful! What would the Survivor say if he
knew what you were planning?"
"The
Survivor?" Spook asked, chuckling. "I have a feeling he'd
approve. If he were here, actually, I think he'd suggest that we do
this very thing . . ."

One can see
Ruin's craftiness in the meticulousness of his planning. He managed
to orchestrate the downfall of the Lord Ruler only a short time
before Preservation's power returned to the Well of Ascension. And
then, within a few years of that event, he had freed himself.
On the time
scale of gods and their power, this very tricky timing was as precise
as an expert cut performed by the most talented of surgeons.





50
THE DOOR TO
THE CAVERN OPENED .
Vin immediately
downed her last vial of metals.
She jumped, tossing
a coin behind herself, leaping up onto the top of one of the
freestanding shelves. The cavern echoed with the sound of stone on
stone as its door opened. Vin threw herself forward—Pushing off
the coin—to shoot toward the front of the room. A crack of
light outlined the door, and even this small amount of illumination
hurt her eyes.
She gritted her
teeth against the light, blinking as she landed. She threw herself up
against the wall just to the side of the door, clutching her knives,
flaring pewter to help herself deal with the sudden pain of light.
Tears crept down her cheeks.
The door stopped
moving. A solitary man stepped into the cavern, bearing a raised
lantern. He wore a fine black suit and gentleman's hat.
Vin ignored him.
She slipped around
the man and ducked through the door, entering the small chamber
beyond. A group of startled workers shied back, dropping ropes which
were connected to the door's opening mechanisms. Vin ignored these
men as well, other than to shove her way through them. Dropping a
coin, she Pushed herself upward. The wooden ladder's rungs became a
blur beside her as she soared up and slammed into the trapdoor in the
ceiling.
And bounced off it
with a grunt of pain.
She desperately
caught rungs of the ladder as she began to fall, ignoring the sudden
sting in her shoulder from hitting so hard. She flared pewter and
pushed down on a rung with her legs, then slammed her back up against
the trapdoor, trying to force it up and open.
She strained. Then,
the rung broke beneath her feet, sending her toppling down again. She
cursed, Pushing off her coin to slow her fall, and hit the floor in a
crouch.
The workers had
backed into a huddle—uncertain whether they wanted to venture
into the dark cavern, but also uncertain whether they wanted to
remain in the small room with a Mistborn. The suited nobleman had
turned. He held his lantern high, illuminating Vin. A bit of broken
ladder rung fell free and cracked to the stone floor beside her.
"The trapdoor
is well secured with a very large rock on top of it, Lady Venture,"
the nobleman said. Vin vaguely recognized him. He was a bit
overweight, but was kempt, with very short hair and a thoughtful
face.
"Tell the men
up above to remove the stone," Vin said quietly, raising a
dagger.
"That is not
going to happen, I'm afraid."
"I can make it
happen," Vin said, stepping forward. The workers pulled back
even further.
The nobleman
smiled. "Lady Venture, let me assure you of several things. The
first is that you are the only Allomancer among us, and so I have no
doubt that you could slaughter us with the barest of efforts. The
second is that the stone above is not moving anytime soon, so we
might as well sit down and have a pleasant chat, as opposed to
brandishing weapons and threatening each other."
There was something
. . . disarming about the man. Vin checked with bronze, but he wasn't
burning any metals. Just to be certain, she Pulled a bit on his
emotions, making him more trusting and friendly, then tried to Soothe
away any sense of guile he might have felt.
"I see that
you're at least considering my offer," the nobleman said, waving
to one of the workers. The worker hastily opened his pack, pulling
out two folding chairs, then arranging them on the ground before the
open stone door. The nobleman placed the lantern to the side, then
sat down.
Vin crept a little
closer. "Why do I recognize you?"
"I'm a friend
of your husband," the nobleman said.
"Telden,"
Vin said, placing him. "Telden Hasting."
Telden nodded. She
had seen him at the ball a few weeks back, the first one they had
attended. But, she'd known him from someplace earlier than that. He'd
been one of Elend's friends in Luthadel, before the Collapse.
Warily, Vin took
the offered seat, trying to figure out Yomen's game. Did he think she
wouldn't kill Telden, just because he'd been Elend's friend?
Telden lounged in
his chair, somewhat less proper than the average nobleman. He waved a
worker forward, and the man presented two bottles. "Wine,"
Telden said. "One is pure, the other contains an extremely
powerful sedative."
Vin raised an
eyebrow. "This is to be some sort of guessing game?"
"Hardly,"
Telden said, opening one of the bottles. "I'm far too
thirsty—and from what I hear, you're not the type who possesses
an excessive amount of patience for games."
Vin cocked her head
as Telden accepted two cups from a servant, then poured some of the
ruby wine into each. As she watched, she realized why he was so
disarming. He reminded her of Elend—the old, carefree Elend.
From what she could tell, this Telden was genuinely still like that.
I have to grant
Yomen that much , she thought. His city may not be perfect,
but he has created a place where men like Telden can retain some of
their innocence .
Telden took a drink
of his wine, proffering the other cup to Vin. She slid one of her
knives into her sheath, then took the cup. She didn't drink—and
had no intention of doing so.
"This is the
wine without the sedative," Telden said. "Good vintage,
too. Yomen is a true gentleman—if he's going to send one of his
friends down into a pit to die, he'll at least provide them with
expensive wine to soften the blow."
"I'm supposed
to believe that you're here to be imprisoned too?" Vin asked
flatly.
"Of course
not," Telden said. "Though many consider my mission to be
hopeless."
"And that
mission is?"
"To get you to
drink some of the drugged wine, so that you can be safely transported
up above."
Vin snorted.
"I see that
you agree with my detractors," Telden said.
"You just gave
yourself away," Vin said. "You just said that I'm supposed
to drink the wine and fall unconscious. That means you have a way to
signal to those above that I've been dealt with, so they can remove
the stone and let you out. You have the power to free us. And I have
the power to make you do as I wish."
"Emotional
Allomancy cannot control me to that extent," Telden said. "I'm
no Allomancer, but I do know something of it. I suspect that you're
manipulating my emotions right now, actually—which really isn't
necessary, since I'm being completely frank with you."
"I don't need
Allomancy to make you talk," Vin said, glancing down at the
knife she still had in her other hand.
Telden laughed.
"You think that King Yomen—yes, he's up above—won't
be able to tell if I'm speaking under duress? I have no doubt that
you'd be able to break me, but I'm not going to betray my word simply
on threats, so you'd have to cut off a few fingers or something
before I'd do as you ask. I'm pretty certain that Yomen and the
others would hear me screaming."
"I could kill
the servants," Vin said. "One at a time, until you agree to
tell Yomen that I'm unconscious and have him open the door."
Telden smiled. "You
think that I'd care if you kill them?"
"You're one of
Elend's friends," Vin said. "You were one of those who
talked philosophy with him."
"Philosophy,"
Telden said, "and politics. Elend, however, was the only one of
us interested in the skaa. I assure you, the rest of us really didn't
understand where he got such a fascination with them." He
shrugged. "However, I'm not a heartless man. If you kill enough
of them, perhaps I would break down and do as you ask. Might
as well get started, then."
Vin glanced at the
servants. They seemed terrified of her, and Telden's words didn't
help. After a few moments of silence, Telden chuckled.
"You are
Elend's wife," he noted. "Yomen is aware of this, you see.
He was mostly convinced that you wouldn't kill any of us, despite
your rather fearsome reputation. From what we hear, you have a habit
of killing kings and gods, perhaps the occasional soldier. Skaa
servants, however . . ."
Vin looked away
from the servants, but didn't meet Telden's eyes, fearing that he'd
see confirmation in them. He was wrong about her—she would kill
those servants if she thought it would get her out. However, she was
uncertain. If Yomen heard screams, he wouldn't be likely to open the
trapdoor, and Vin would have slaughtered innocents for no reason.
"So,"
Telden said, finishing off his wine. "We are at a stalemate. We
assume that you're running low on food down here, unless you've found
a way to open those cans. Even if you have, there's nothing you can
do down here to help up above. My guess is that unless you take the
wine, we'll all end up starving to death in this cavern."
Vin sat back in her
chair. There has to be a way out—a chance to
exploit this.
However, it was
incredibly unlikely that she'd be able to break through that door
above. She could maybe use duralumin and steel to Push her
way through. However, her steel and pewter would be gone, and she was
out of metal vials.
Telden's words,
unfortunately, held a great deal of truth. Even if Vin could survive
in the cavern, she'd be stagnant and useless. The siege would
continue up above—she didn't even know how that was going—and
the world would continue to die by Ruin's machinations.
She needed to get
out of the cavern. Even if that meant being put into Yomen's hands.
She eyed the bottle of drugged wine.
Damn , She
thought. That obligator is far cleverer than we expected .
The wine would certainly have been prepared with enough strength to
knock out an Allomancer.
However .
. .
Pewter made the
body resistant to all kinds of drugs. If she flared pewter with
duralumin after drinking the wine, would it perhaps burn away the
poison and leave her awake? She could pretend to be unconscious, then
escape above.
It seemed like a
stretch. And yet, what was she to do? Her food was almost gone, and
her chances for escaping were slim. She didn't know what Yomen wanted
of her—and Telden would be very unlikely to tell her—but
he must not want her dead. If that had been the case, he'd simply
have left her to starve.
She had a choice.
Either wait longer in the cavern, or gamble on a better chance to
escape up above. She thought for just a moment, then made up her
mind. She reached for the bottle. Even if her trick with pewter
didn't work, she'd rather gamble on getting into a better situation
up above.
Telden chuckled.
"They did say that you were a decisive one. That's rather
refreshing—I've spent far too long with stuffy noblemen who
take years to come to any firm decisions."
Vin ignored him.
She easily popped the cork off of the bottle, then raised it and took
a swig. The drugs began to take effect almost immediately. She
settled back in her chair, letting her eyes droop, trying to give the
impression that she was falling asleep. Indeed, it was very difficult
to remain awake. Her mind was clouding despite flared pewter.
She slumped,
feeling herself drift away. Here goes, she thought, then
burned duralumin. Her body flared with hyperenhanced pewter.
Immediately, the feeling of tiredness went away. She almost bolted
upright from the sudden burst of energy. Telden was chuckling. "I'll
be," he said to one of the servants. "She actually went for
it."
"You'd be dead
if she hadn't, my lord," the servant said. "We'd all be
dead."
And then the
duralumin ran out. Her pewter disappeared with a puff, and with it
went her immunity to the drug, which hadn't burned away. It had been
a long shot anyway.
She barely heard
her weapon click as it slipped from her fingers and hit the floor.
Then, she fell unconscious.

Once Ruin was
free from his prison, he was able to influence people more
strongly—but impaling someone with a Hemalurgic spike was
difficult no matter what the circumstances .
To achieve such
things, he apparently began with people who already had a tenuous
grip on reality. Their insanity made them more open to his touch, and
he could use them to spike more stable people. Either way, it's
impressive how many important people Ruin managed to spike. King
Penrod, ruling Luthadel at the time, is a very good example of this .





51
ELEND FLEW
THROUGH THE MISTS. He'd never quite been able to manage
Vin's horse shoe trick. Somehow, she could keep herself in the air,
bounding from Push to Push, then Pulling each horseshoe back up
behind her after she used it. To Elend, the process looked like a
cyclone of potentially lethal chunks of metal with Vin at the center.
He dropped a coin,
then Pushed himself in a powerful leap. He'd given up on the
horseshoe method after four or five failed attempts. Vin had seemed
puzzled that he couldn't get it down—she'd apparently figured
it out on her own, needing only about a half hour's practice to
perfect it.
But, well, that was
Vin.
Elend made do with
coins, of which he carried a rather large bag. Copper clips, the
smallest of the old imperial coins, worked perfectly for his
purposes—particularly since he was apparently much more
powerful than other Mistborn. Each of his Pushes carried him farther
than they should have, and he really didn't use that many coins, even
when traveling a long distance.
It felt good to be
away. He felt free as he plunged down from his leap, dropping through
the shifting darkness, then flared pewter and landed with a muffled
thump. The ground in this particular valley was relatively free of
ash—it had drifted, leaving a small corridor where it only came
up to his mid-calf. So, he ran for a few minutes, for the change.
A mistcloak
fluttered behind him. He wore dark clothing, rather than one of his
white uniforms. It seemed appropriate; besides, he'd never really had
a chance to be a true Mistborn. Since discovering his powers, he'd
spent his life at war. There wasn't all that much need for him to go
scuttling about in the darkness, particularly not with Vin around to
do it better.
I can see why
Vin would find this intoxicating , he thought, dropping another
coin and bounding between two hilltops. Even with the stress of Vin's
capture and the threat to the empire, there was an exhilarating
freedom about cruising through the mists. It almost allowed him to
forget about the wars, the destruction, and the responsibility.
Then, he landed,
ash coming up to nearly his waist. He stood for a few moments,
looking down at the soft black powder. He couldn't escape it. Vin was
in danger, the empire was collapsing, and his people were starving.
It was his job to fix these things—that was the burden he'd
taken upon himself when he'd become emperor.
He Pushed himself
into the air, leaving a trail of ash fluttering in the mists behind
him.
I certainly
hope Sazed and Breeze are having better luck in Urteau , he
thought. He was worried about his chances with Fadrex, and the
Central Dominance was going to need the grain in the Urteau cache if
they were going to plant enough food for the coming winter.
He couldn't worry
about that now. He simply had to count on his friends to be
effective. Elend's job was to do something to help Vin. He couldn't
just sit and wait in the camp, letting Yomen pull the strings. And
yet, he didn't dare try to assassinate Yomen—not after the man
had tricked both of them so cleverly.
And so, Elend ran,
heading northeast, toward the last known location of a koloss army.
The time for subtlety and diplomacy was over. Elend needed a
threat—something he could hold over Yomen's head and, if
necessary, use to batter him. And nothing was better at battering a
city than koloss. Perhaps he was a fool for seeking out the brutes on
his own. Perhaps it was wrong to give up on diplomacy. Yet, he had
made his decision. It seemed he had failed in so many things
lately—protecting Vin, keeping Luthadel safe, defending his
people—that he simply needed to act.
Ahead, he saw a
light in the mists. He landed, running through a field of knee-deep
ash. Only flared pewter gave him the strength to manage it. When he
got closer, he saw a village. He heard screams. He saw shadows
scrambling about in fright.
He leaped, dropping
a coin, flaring his metals. He passed through curling mist, looming
over the village and its frightened occupants, his mistcloak flaring.
Several of the homes were burning. And, by that light, he could see
the hulking dark forms of koloss moving through the streets. Elend
picked a beast who was raising its weapon to strike, then Pulled.
Below, he heard the koloss grunt, but it managed to hang onto its
weapon. However, the koloss itself wasn't that much heavier than
Elend—and so it was Pulled up into the air by one arm as Elend
was yanked downward. Elend Pulled himself against a door hinge as he
fell, edging himself just to the side of the confused flying koloss.
He sprayed the beast with coins as he passed.
Beast and weapon
spun in the air. Elend landed in the street before a huddled group of
skaa. The flying koloss's weapon hit the ashen earth point-first
beside him. The koloss itself dropped dead on the other side of the
street.
A large group of
koloss turned, bloodred eyes shining in the firelight, frenzy making
them excited about the prospect of a challenge. He would have to
frighten them first, before he'd be able to take control of them. He
was looking forward to that this time.
How could they
possibly have once been people? Elend wondered, dashing forward
and yanking the fallen koloss sword from the ground as he passed it,
throwing out a spray of black soil. The Lord Ruler had created the
creatures. Was this what had happened to those who had opposed him?
Had they become koloss to make his army? The creatures had great
strength and fortitude, and could subsist on the barest of
sustenance. Yet, to make men—even your enemies—into
monsters such as this?
Elend ducked
forward, dropping one beast by shearing its legs at the knees. Then
he jumped, lopping off the arm of another. He spun, slamming his
crude sword through the chest of a third. He felt no remorse at
killing what had once been innocents. Those people were dead. The
creatures that remained would propagate themselves by using other
humans unless they were stopped.
Or unless they were
controlled.
Elend cried out,
spinning through the group of koloss, wielding a sword that should
have been too heavy for him. More and more creatures took notice,
turning to tromp down streets lit by the light of burning buildings.
This was a very large group, by scout reports—some thirty
thousand in number. That many would quickly overrun such a small
village, annihilating it like a small pile of ash before storm winds.
Elend would not let
that happen. He fought, killing beast after beast. He'd come to gain
himself a new army, but as the time passed, he found himself fighting
for another reason. How many villages such as this one had been
destroyed without anyone in Luthadel pausing to give so much as a
passing thought? How many subjects—claimed by Elend, even if
they didn't know it—had he lost to the koloss? How many had he
failed to protect already?
Elend sheared a
koloss head free, then spun, Pushing two smaller beasts away by their
swords. A massive twelve-footer was stomping forward, weapon raised.
Elend gritted his teeth, then raised his own sword, flaring pewter.
Weapon met weapon
in the blazing village, metal ringing like a forge under the hammer.
And Elend stood his ground, matching strength with a monster twice
his height.
The koloss stood,
dumbfounded.
Stronger than I
should be , Elend thought, twisting and cutting the surprised
creature's arm free. Why can't that strength protect the people I
rule?
He cried out,
slicing the koloss clean through at the waist—if only to show
that he could. The beast fell into two gory pieces.
Why? Elend
thought with rage. What strength must I possess, what must I do,
to protect them?
Vin's words, spoken
months ago back in the city of Vetitan, returned to him. She'd called
everything he did short-term. But, what more could he do? He was no
slayer of gods, no divine hero of prophecy. He was just a man.
And, it seemed that
these days, ordinary men—even Allomancers—weren't worth
very much. He screamed as he killed, ripping through another pack of
koloss. And yet, like his efforts back at Fadrex, it just didn't seem
like enough.
Around him, the
village still burned. As he fought, he could hear women crying,
children screaming, men dying. Even the efforts of a Mistborn were
negligible. He could kill and kill, but that would not save the
people of the village. He screamed, Pushing out with a Soothing, yet
the koloss resisted him. He didn't bring even a single one under his
control. Did that mean that an Inquisitor controlled them? Or were
they simply not frightened enough?
He fought on. And,
as he did, the prevalence of death around him seemed a metaphor for
all he had done over the last three years. He should have been able
to protect the people—he'd tried so hard to protect
the people. He'd stopped armies, overthrown tyrants, reworked laws,
and scavenged supplies. And yet, all of that was a tiny drop of
salvation in a vast ocean of death, chaos, and pain. He couldn't save
the empire by protecting a corner of it, just as he couldn't save the
village by killing a small fraction of the koloss.
What good was
killing another monster if it was just replaced by two more? What
good was food to feed his people if the ash just smothered everything
anyway? What good was he, an emperor who couldn't even defend the
people of a single village?
Elend had never
lusted for power. He'd been a theorist and a scholar—ruling an
empire had mostly been an academic exercise for him. Yet, as he
fought on that dark night in the burning mists and falling ash, he
began to understand. As people died around him despite his most
frenzied efforts, he could see what would drive men for more and more
power.
Power to protect.
At that moment, he would have accepted the powers of god-hood, if it
would mean having the strength to save the people around him.
He dropped another
koloss, then spun as he heard a scream. A young woman was being
pulled from a nearby house, despite an older man holding onto her
arm, both yelling for help. Elend reached to his sash, pulling free
his bag of coins. He tossed it into the air, then simultaneously
Pushed on some of the coins inside and Pulled on others. The sack
exploded with twinkling bits of metal, and Elend shot some forward
into the body of the koloss yanking on the woman.
It grunted, but did
not stop. Coins rarely worked against koloss—you had to hit
them just right to kill them. Vin could do it.
Elend wasn't in a
mood for such subtlety, even had he possessed it. He yelled in
defiance, snapping more coins at the beast. He flipped them up off
the ground toward himself, then flung them forward, shooting missile
after glittering missile into the creature's blue body. Its back
became a glistening mass of too-red blood, and finally it slumped
over.
Elend spun, turning
from the relieved father and daughter to face down another koloss. It
raised its weapon to strike, but Elend just screamed at it in anger.
I should be
able to protect them! he thought. He needed to take control of
the entire group, not waste time fighting them one at a time. But,
they resisted his Allomancy, even as he Pushed on their emotions
again. Where was the Inquisitor guardian?
As the koloss swung
its weapon, Elend flared pewter and flung himself to the side, then
sheared the creature's hand free at the wrist. As the beast screamed
in pain, Elend threw himself back into the fight. The villagers began
to rally around him. They obviously had no training for war—they
were likely under Yomen's protection and didn't need to worry about
bandits or roving armies. Yet, despite their lack of skill, they
obviously knew to stay close to the Mistborn. Their desperate,
pleading eyes prodded Elend on, drove him to cut down koloss after
koloss.
For the moment, he
didn't have to worry about the right or wrong of the situation. He
could simply fight. The desire for battle burned within him
like metal—the desire, even, to kill. And so he fought
on—fought for the surprise in the eyes of the townspeople, for
the hope each of his blows seemed to inspire. They had given their
lives up for lost, and then a man had dropped from the sky to defend
them.
Two years before,
during the siege of Luthadel, Vin had attacked Cett's fortification
and slaughtered three hundred of his soldiers. Elend had trusted that
she had good reasons for the attack, but he'd never understood how
she could do such a thing. At least, not until this night, fighting
in an unnamed village, too much ash in the dark sky, the mists on
fire, koloss dying in ranks before him.
The Inquisitor
didn't appear. Frustrated, Elend spun away from a group of koloss,
leaving one dying in his wake, then extinguished his metals. The
creatures surrounded him, and he burned duralumin, then burned zinc,
and Pulled.
The village fell
silent.
Elend paused,
stumbling slightly as he finished his spin. He looked through the
falling ash, turning toward the remaining koloss—thousands and
thousands of them—who now suddenly stood motionless and patient
around him, under his control at last.
There's no way
I took them all at once , he thought warily. What had happened
to the Inquisitor? There was usually one with a mob of koloss this
big. Had it fled? That would explain why suddenly Elend had been able
to control the koloss.
Worried, yet
uncertain what else to do, he turned to scan the village. Some people
had gathered to stare at him. They seemed to be in shock—instead
of doing something about the burning buildings, they simply stood in
the mists, watching him.
He should have felt
triumphant. And yet, his victory was spoiled by the Inquisitor's
absence. In addition, the village was in flames—by this point,
very few structures remained that weren't burning. Elend hadn't saved
the village. He'd found his koloss army, as he'd planned, but he felt
as if he'd failed in some greater way. He sighed, dropping his sword
from tired, bloody fingers, then walked toward the villagers. As he
moved, he was disturbed by the number of koloss bodies he passed. Had
he really slain so many?
Another part of
him—quiescent now, but still aflame—was sorry that the
time for killing had ended. He stopped before a silent group of
villagers.
"You're him,
aren't you?" an elderly man asked.
"Who?"
Elend asked.
"The Lord
Ruler," the man whispered.
Elend looked down
at his black uniform, encased in a mistcloak, both of which were
slick with blood.
"Close
enough," he said, turning to the east—toward where his
human army camped many miles away, waiting for him to return with a
new koloss force to aid them. There was only one reason for him to do
that. Finally, he acknowledged what he'd decided, unconsciously, the
moment he'd set out to find more of the creatures.
The time for
killing hasn't ended at all, he thought. It has just begun .

Near the end,
the ash began to pile up in frightening amounts. I've spoken of the
special microbes that the Lord Ruler devised to help the world deal
with the ashfalls. They did not "feed" on ash, really.
Rather, they broke it down as an aspect of their metabolic functions.
Volcanic ash itself is, actually, good for soil, depending on what
one wishes to grow .
Too much of
anything, however, is deadly. Water is necessary for survival, yet
too much will drown. During the history of the Final Empire, the land
balanced on the very knife-edge of disaster via the ash. The microbes
broke it down about as rapidly as it fell, but when there was so much
of it that it oversaturated the soil, it became more difficult for
plants to survive .
In the end, the
entire system fell apart. Ash fell so steadily that it smothered and
killed, and the world's plant life died off. The microbes had no
chance of keeping up, for they needed time and nutrients to reproduce
.





52
DURING THE
DAYS OF THE LORD RULER, Luthadel had been the most crowded
city in the world. Filled with three- and four-story tenements, it
had been packed with the skaa who'd worked its numerous furnaces and
forges, with the noble merchants who'd sold its goods, and with the
high nobility who'd simply wanted to be near the imperial court.
TenSoon had assumed that now, with the Lord Ruler dead and the
imperial government shattered, Luthadel would become far less densely
populated.
He had, apparently,
been wrong.
Still wearing the
wolfhound's body, he trotted along in amazement as he explored the
streets. It seemed that every nook—every alleyway, every street
corner, each and every tenement—had become home to a skaa
family. The city smelled terrible, and refuse clogged the streets,
buried in ash.
What is going
on? he wondered. The skaa lived in filth, many of them looking
sick, coughing piteously in their ash-filled gutters. TenSoon made
his way toward Keep Venture. If there were answers to be found, he
hoped to locate them there. Occasionally, he had to growl menacingly
at skaa who looked at him hungrily, and twice he had to run from
gangs that ignored his growls.
Surely Vin and
Elend would not have let this city fall so far , he thought as
he hid in an alley. It was a foreboding sign. He'd left Luthadel
without knowing whether or not his friends would even survive the
city's siege. Elend's banner—the spear and the scroll—flew
at the front of the city, but could someone else have taken Elend's
sign as their own? And what of the koloss army that had threatened to
destroy Luthadel a year ago?
I should never
have left her , TenSoon thought, feeling a stab of anxiety. My
foolish kandra sense of duty. I should have stayed here, and told her
what I know, little though it is .
The world could
end because of my foolish honor .
He poked his head
out of the alleyway, looking at Keep Venture. TenSoon's heart sank to
see that its beautiful stained-glass windows had been shattered.
Crude boards blocked the broken holes. There were guards at the front
gates, however, which seemed a better sign.
TenSoon crept
forward, trying to look like a mangy stray. He kept to the shadows,
edging his way up to the gate. Then, he lay down in some refuse to
watch the soldiers. He expanded his eardrums, craning to hear what
the men were saying.
It turned out to be
nothing. The two guards stood quietly, looking bored and not a little
disconsolate as they leaned against their obsidian-tipped spears.
TenSoon waited, wishing that Vin were there to Pull on the emotions
of the guards, making them more talkative.
Of course, if
Vin were here, I wouldn't have to be poking about for information ,
TenSoon thought with frustration. And so, he waited. Waited as the
ash fell, waited even until the sky darkened and the mists came out.
Their appearance finally sparked some life into the guards. "I
hate night duty," one of them muttered.
"Nothing wrong
with night," the other one said. "Not for us. Mists didn't
kill us. We're safe from them."
What? TenSoon
thought, frowning to himself.
"Are we safe
from the king?" the first guard said quietly.
His companion shot
him a glance. "Don't say such things."
The first guard
shrugged. "I just hope the emperor gets back soon."
"King Penrod
has all of the emperor's authority," the second guard said
sternly.
Ah ,
TenSoon thought. So Penrod managed to keep the throne. But .
. . what's this about an emperor? TenSoon feared that the
emperor was Straff Venture. That terrible man had been the one poised
to take Luthadel when TenSoon had left.
But what of Vin?
Somehow, TenSoon just couldn't bring himself to believe that she had
been defeated. He had watched her kill Zane Venture, a man who had
been burning atium when Vin had none. She'd done the impossible three
times, to TenSoon's count. She'd slain the Lord Ruler. She'd defeated
Zane.
And she'd
befriended a kandra who had been determined to hate her.
The guards fell
silent again. This is foolish, TenSoon thought. I don't
have time to hide in corners and eavesdrop. The world is ending!
He rose, shaking the ash from his body—an action that caused
the guards to start, raising their spears anxiously as they searched
the darkening night for the source of the sound.
TenSoon hesitated,
their nervousness giving him an idea. He turned and loped off into
the night. He'd grown to know the city quite well during his year
serving with Vin—she had liked to patrol the city, particularly
the areas around Keep Venture. Even with his knowledge, however, it
took TenSoon some time to find his way to where he was going. He had
never visited the location, but he had heard it described.
Described by a
person whom TenSoon had been killing at the time.
The memory still
brought him chills. Kandra served Contracts—and in Contracts,
they usually were required to imitate specific individuals. A master
would provide the proper body—kandra were forbidden to kill
humans themselves—and the kandra would emulate it. However,
before any of that happened, the kandra would usually study its
quarry, learning as much about them as possible.
TenSoon had killed
OreSeur, his generation brother. OreSeur, who had helped overthrow
the Father. At Kelsier's command, OreSeur had pretended to be a
nobleman named Lord Renoux so that Kelsier would have an apparent
nobleman as a front to use in his plan to overthrow the empire. But,
there had been a more important part for OreSeur to play in Kelsier's
plot. A secret part that not even the other members of the crew had
known until after Kelsier's death.
TenSoon arrived at
the old warehouse. It stood where OreSeur had said it would. TenSoon
shuddered, remembering OreSeur's screams. The kandra had died beneath
TenSoon's torture, torture which had been necessary, for TenSoon had
needed to learn all that he could. Every secret. All that he would
need in order to convincingly imitate his brother.
That day, TenSoon's
hatred of humans—and at himself for serving them—had
burned more deeply than ever before. How Vin had overcome that, he
still didn't know.
The warehouse
before TenSoon was now a holy place, ornamented and maintained by the
Church of the Survivor. A plaque hung out front, displaying the sign
of the spear—the weapon by which both Kelsier and the Lord
Ruler had died—and giving a written explanation of why the
warehouse was important.
TenSoon knew the
story already. This was the place where the crew had found a
stockpile of weapons, left by the Survivor to arm the skaa people for
their revolution. It had been discovered the same day that Kelsier
had died, and rumors whispered that the spirit of the Survivor had
appeared in this place, giving guidance to his followers. Those
rumors were true, after a fashion. TenSoon rounded the building,
following instructions OreSeur had given as he died. The Blessing of
Presence let TenSoon recall the precise words, and despite the ash,
he found the spot—a place where the cobbles were disturbed.
Then, he began to dig.
Kelsier, the
Survivor of Hathsin, had indeed appeared to his followers that night
years ago. Or, at least, his bones had. OreSeur had been commanded to
take the Survivor's own body and digest it, then appear to the
faithful skaa and give them encouragement. The legends of the
Survivor, the whole religion that had sprung up around him, had been
started by a kandra.
And TenSoon had
eventually killed that kandra. But not before learning his secrets.
Secrets such as where OreSeur had buried the bones of the Survivor,
and how the man had looked.
TenSoon smiled as
he unearthed the first bone. They were years old now, and he hated
using old bones. Plus, there would be no hair, so the one he created
would be bald. Still, the opportunity was too valuable to pass up.
He'd only seen the Survivor once, but with his expertise in imitation
. . .
Well, it was worth
a try.
Wellen leaned
against his spear, watching those mists again. Rittle—his
companion guard—said they weren't dangerous. But, Rittle hadn't
seen what they could do. What they could reveal. Wellen figured that
he had survived because he respected them. That, and because he
didn't think too hard about the things he had seen.
"You think
Skiff and Jaston will be late to relieve us again?" Wellen
asked, trying again to start a conversation.
Rittle just
grunted. "Dunno, Wells." Rittle never did care for small
talk.
"I think maybe
one of us should go see," Wellen said, eyeing the mist. "You
know, ask if they've come in yet. . . ." He trailed off.
Something was out
there.
Lord Ruler! he
thought, cringing back. Not again!
But, no attack came
from the mists. Instead, a dark figure strode forward. Rittle perked
up, lowering his spear. "Halt!"
A man walked from
the mists, wearing a deep black cloak, arms at his sides, hood up.
His face, however, was visible. Wellen frowned. Something about this
man looked familiar. . . .
Rittle gasped, then
fell to his knees, clutching something at his neck—the pendant
of a silver spear that he always wore. Wellen frowned. Then he
noticed the scars on this newcomer's arms.
Lord Ruler!
Wellen thought in shock, realizing where he'd seen this man's
face. It had been in a painting, one of many available in the city,
that depicted the Survivor of Hathsin.
"Rise,"
the stranger said, speaking in a benevolent voice.
Rittle stood on
shaking feet. Wellen backed away, uncertain whether to be awed or
terrified, and feeling a little of both.
"I have come
to commend your faith," the Survivor said.
"My lord . .
." Rittle said, his head still bowed.
"Also,"
Kelsier said, raising a finger. "I have come to tell you I do
not approve of how this city is being run. My people are sick, they
starve, and they die."
"My lord,"
Rittle said, "there is not enough food, and there have been
riots seizing that which was stockpiled. My lord, and the mists kill!
Please, why have you sent them to kill us!"
"I did no such
thing," Kelsier said. "I know that food is scarce, but you
must share what you have and have hope. Tell me of the man who rules
this city."
"King Penrod?"
Rittle asked. "He rules for Emperor Elend Venture, who is away
at war."
"Lord Elend
Venture? And he approves of how this city is being treated?"
Kelsier looked angry. Wellen cringed.
"No, my lord!"
Rittle said, shaking. "I . . ."
"Lord Penrod
is mad," Wellen found himself saying.
The Survivor turned
toward him.
"Wells, you
shouldn't . . ." Rittle said, but then trailed off, the Survivor
shooting him a stern look.
"Speak,"
the Survivor said to Wellen.
"He speaks to
the air, my lord," Wellen said, averting his eyes. "Talks
to himself—claims that he can see the Lord Ruler standing
beside him. Penrod . . . he's given lots of strange orders, lately.
Forcing the skaa to fight each other for food, claiming that only the
strong should survive. He kills those who disagree with him. That
kind of thing."
"I see,"
the Survivor said.
Surely he knows
this already , Wellen thought. Why bother asking?
"Where is my
Heir?" the Survivor asked. "The Hero of Ages, Vin."
"The Lady
Empress?" Wellen asked. "She's with the emperor."
"Where?"
"Nobody knows
for certain, my lord," Rittle said, still shaking. "She
hasn't returned in a long time. My sergeant says that she and the
emperor are fighting in the South, fighting koloss. But I've heard
other men say the army went to the west."
"That's not
very helpful," Kelsier said.
Wellen perked up,
remembering something.
"What?"
the Survivor asked, apparently noticing Wellen's change in posture.
"An army troop
stopped by the city a few months ago," Wellen said, feeling
proud. "They kept it quiet, but I was in the group that helped
them resupply. Lord Breeze was with them, and he spoke of meeting up
with others of your crew."
"Where?"
Kelsier asked. "Where were they going?"
"North,"
Wellen said. "To Urteau. That must be where the emperor is, my
lord. The Northern Dominance is in rebellion. He must have taken his
armies to quell it."
The Survivor
nodded. "Very well," he said. He turned as if to go, then
paused, looking back. "Pass what news you can," he said.
"There isn't much time left. Tell the people that when the mists
leave, they should immediately find shelter. A place underground, if
possible."
Wellen paused, then
nodded. "The caverns," he said. "Where you trained
your army?"
"That will
do," Kelsier said. "Farewell."
The Survivor
disappeared into the mists.
TenSoon left the
gates of Keep Venture behind, running off into the mists. He could,
perhaps, have gotten himself into the building. However, he wasn't
certain how well his imitation of the Survivor would hold up under
closer scrutiny.
He didn't know how
reliable the two guards' information was. However, he had no better
leads. Other people he had talked to in the night hadn't been able to
provide any information about the army's movements. Evidently, Vin
and Elend had been gone from Luthadel for quite some time.
He rushed back to
the patch of earth behind the warehouse where he'd found Kelsier's
body. He knelt in the darkness, uncovering the sack he'd stuffed with
bones. He needed to get the dog's body back and head north. Hopefully
he would—
"You there!"
a voice said.
TenSoon looked up
reflexively. A man stood in the doorway of the warehouse, looking
through the mists at TenSoon. A lantern flared to life behind him,
revealing a group of people who had apparently taken up residence
inside of the holy place.
Uh, oh . .
. TenSoon thought as those at the front adopted shocked expressions.
"My lord!"
the man in front said, quickly kneeling in his sleeping robe. "You've
returned!"
TenSoon stood,
stepping carefully to hide the sack of bones behind him. "I
have," he said.
"We knew that
you would," the man said as others began to whisper and cry out
behind him. Many fell to their knees. "We stayed in this place,
praying for you to come give us counsel. The king is mad, my lord!
What do we do?"
TenSoon was tempted
to expose himself as a kandra, but looking into their hopeful eyes,
he found that he could not. Besides, perhaps he could do some good.
"Penrod has been corrupted by Ruin," he said. "The
thing that seeks to destroy the world. You must gather the faithful
and escape this city before Penrod kills you all."
"My lord,
where should we go?"
TenSoon hesitated.
Where? "There are a pair of guards at the front of Keep Venture.
They know of a place. Listen to them. You must get to a
place underground. Do you understand?"
"Yes, lord,"
the man said. Behind, more and more people were edging forward,
straining to catch a glimpse of TenSoon. He bore their scrutiny with
some nervousness. Finally, he bid them be careful, then fled into the
night.
He found an empty
building and quickly changed back to the dog's bones before anyone
else could see him. When he was done, he eyed the Survivor's bones,
feeling a strange . . . reverence.
Don't be silly
, he told himself. They're just bones, like hundreds of
other sets you've used . Still, it seemed foolish to leave such
a potentially powerful tool behind. He carefully packed them into the
sack he'd pilfered, then—using paws he'd created to have more
dexterity than those of a real wolfhound—he tied the sack on
his back.
After that, TenSoon
left the city by the northern gate, running at full wolfhound speed.
He would go to Urteau and hope that he was on the right path.

The pact
between Preservation and Ruin is a thing of gods, and difficult to
explain in human terms. Indeed, initially, there was a stalemate
between them. On one hand, each knew that only by working together
could they create. On the other hand, both knew that they would never
have complete satisfaction in what they created. Preservation would
not be able to keep things perfect and unchanging, and Ruin would not
be able to destroy completely .
Ruin, of
course, eventually acquired the ability to end the world and gain the
satisfaction he wanted. But, then, that wasn't originally part of the
bargain .





53
SPOOK FOUND
HER SITTING on the rocky lakeshore, looking out across the
deep black waters, so still in the cavern's windless air. In the near
distance, Spook could hear Sazed—with a large contingent of
Goradel's men—working on their project to stanch the flow of
water into the cavern.
Spook approached
Beldre quietly, carrying a mug of warmed tea. It almost seemed to
burn his flesh, which meant that it would be just right for normal
people. He let his own food and drinks sit out until they cooled to
room temperature.
He didn't wear his
eye bandage. With pewter, he'd found that he could withstand a little
lantern-light. She didn't turn as he approached, so he cleared his
throat. She jumped slightly. It was no wonder that Quellion worked so
hard to shelter the girl—one could not fake Beldre's level of
innocence. She wouldn't survive three heartbeats in the underground.
Even Allrianne, who did her best to look like a puff, had an edge to
her that bespoke an ability to be as hard as necessary in order to
survive. Beldre, though . . .
She's normal ,
Spook thought. This is how people would be, if they didn't have
to deal with Inquisitors, armies, and assassins . For that, he
actually envied her. It was a strange feeling, after so many years
spent wishing that he were someone more important.
She turned back
toward the waters, and he approached and sat beside her. "Here,"
he said, handing her the mug. "I know it gets a bit chilly down
here, with the lake and the water."
She paused, then
took the mug. "Thank you," she whispered. Spook let her
roam free in the cavern—there was very little she could
sabotage, though he had warned Goradel's men to keep an eye on her.
Either way, there was no way she was going to get out. Spook kept two
dozen men guarding the exit, and had ordered the ladder up to the
trapdoor above removed, to be replaced only with proper
authorization.
"Hard to
believe this place was beneath your city all along, isn't it?"
Spook said, trying to work into a conversation. Oddly, it had seemed
easier to speak to her when he was confronting her in her gardens,
surrounded by danger.
Beldre nodded. "My
brother would have loved to find this place. He worries about food
supplies. Fewer and fewer fish are being caught in the northern
lakes. And crops . . . well, they're not doing so well, I hear."
"The mists,"
Spook said. "They don't let enough sunlight through for most
plants."
Beldre nodded,
looking down at her mug. She hadn't taken a sip yet.
"Beldre,"
Spook said, "I'm sorry. I actually considered kidnapping you
from those gardens, but decided against it. However, with you showing
up here, alone . . ."
"It was just
too good an opportunity," she said bitterly. "I understand.
It's my own fault. My brother always says I'm too trusting."
"There are
times that would be an advantage."
Beldre sniffed
quietly. "I've never known such times as that. It seems my
entire life, I've just trusted and been hurt. This is no different."
Spook sat, feeling
frustrated with himself. Kelsier, tell me what to say! he
thought. Yet, God remained silent. The Survivor didn't seem to have
much advice about things that didn't relate to securing the city.
It had all seemed
so simple when Spook had given the order to capture her. Why, now,
was he sitting here with this empty pit in his stomach?
"I believed in
him, you know," Beldre said.
"Your
brother?"
"No," she
said with a slight shake of her head. "The Lord Ruler. I was a
good little noblewoman. I always gave my payments to the
obligators—paying extra, even, and calling them in to witness
the smallest things. I also paid them to come tutor me in the history
of the empire. I thought everything was perfect. So neat; so
peaceful. And then, they tried to kill me. Turns out I'm half skaa.
My father wanted a child so desperately, and my mother was barren. He
had two children with one of the maidservants—my mother even
approved."
She shook her head.
"Why would someone do that?" she continued. "I mean,
why not pick a noblewoman? No. My father chose the servant woman. I
guess he fancied her or something. . . ." She looked down.
"For me, it
was my grandfather," Spook said. "I never knew him. Grew up
on the streets."
"Sometimes I
wish I had," Beldre said. "Then maybe this would
all make sense. What do you do when the priests you've been paying to
tutor you since you were a child—men you trusted more than your
own parents—come to take you away for execution? I would have
died, too. I just went with them. Then . . ."
"Then what?"
Spook asked.
"You saved
me," she whispered. "The Survivor's crew. You overthrew the
Lord Ruler, and in the chaos, everybody forgot about people like me.
The obligators were too busy trying to please Straff."
"And then,
your brother took over."
She nodded quietly.
"I thought he'd be a good ruler. He really is a good man! He
just wants everything to be stable and secure. Peace for everyone.
Yet, sometimes, the things he does to people . . . the
things he asks of people . . ."
"I'm sorry,"
Spook said.
She shook her head.
"And then you came. You rescued that child, right in front of
Quellion and me. You came to my gardens, and you didn't even threaten
me. I thought . . . maybe he really is as the stories say. Maybe
he'll help. And, like the idiot I always am, I just came."
"I wish things
were simple, Beldre," Spook said. "I wish I could let you
go. But, this is for the greater good."
"That's just
what Quellion always says, you know," she said.
Spook paused.
"You're a lot
alike, you two," she said. "Forceful. Commanding."
Spook chuckled.
"You really don't know me very well, do you?"
She flushed.
"You're the Survivor of the Flames. Don't think I haven't heard
the rumors—my brother can't keep me out of all of his
conferences."
"Rumors,"
Spook said, "are rarely reliable."
"You're a
member of the Survivor's crew."
Spook shrugged.
"That's true. Though, I became a member by accident."
She frowned,
glancing at him.
"Kelsier
handpicked the others," Spook said. "Ham, Breeze,
Sazed—even Vin. He chose my uncle too. And, by doing so, he got
me as a bonus. I . . . I was never really part of it all, Beldre. I
was kind of like an observer. They posted me on watch and things like
that. I sat in on the planning sessions, and everyone just treated me
like an errand boy. I must have refilled Breeze's cup a hundred times
during that first year!"
A hint of amusement
showed on her face. "You make it sound like you were a servant."
"Pretty much,"
Spook said, smiling. "I couldn't talk very well—I'd grown
used to speaking in an Eastern street slang, and everything I said
came out garbled. I've still got an accent, they tell me. So, I just
stayed quiet most of the time, embarrassed. The crew was nice to me,
but I knew I was pretty much just ignored."
"And now
you're in charge of them all."
Spook laughed. "No.
Sazed's the one really in charge of us here. Breeze ranks me too, but
he lets me give orders because he's too lazy to do so. He likes to
make people do things without them knowing it. Half the time, I'm
certain that the things I'm saying are just ideas he somehow got into
my head."
Beldre shook her
head. "The Terrisman is in charge? But, he looks to you!"
"He just lets
me do what he doesn't want to," Spook said. "Sazed's a
great man—one of the best I've known. But, well, he's a
scholar. He's better off studying a project and writing notes than he
is giving commands. So, that only leaves me. I'm just doing the job
that everyone else is too busy to do."
Beldre sat quietly
for a moment, then finally took a sip of her tea. "Ah," she
said. "It's good!"
"The Lord
Ruler's own brew, for all we know," Spook said. "We found
it down here, with the rest of this stuff."
"This is why
you came, isn't it?" Beldre asked, nodding to the cavern. "I
wondered why your emperor cared about Urteau. We haven't really been
an important force in the world since the Venture line moved its
center of power to Luthadel."
Spook nodded. "This
is part of it, though Elend is also worried about the rebellion up
here. It's dangerous, having a foe who is slaughtering noblemen
controlling one of the major cities just a short distance north of
Luthadel. That's all I can really tell you, though. Most of the time,
I feel like I'm still just a bystander in all of this. Vin
and Elend, they're the ones who really know what's going on. To them,
I'm the guy they could spare to spend months spying in Urteau while
they did important work in the South."
"They are
wrong to treat you so," Beldre said.
"No, it's all
right," Spook said. "I've kind of enjoyed being up here. I
feel like I've been able to do something, finally."
She nodded. After a
short time, she set down her cup, wrapping her arms around her knees.
"What are they like?" she asked. "I've heard so many
stories. They say that Emperor Venture always wears white, and that
the ash refuses to stick to him! He can quell an army just by looking
at them. And his wife, the Survivor's heir. Mistborn . . ."
Spook smiled.
"Elend is a forgetful scholar—twice as bad as Sazed ever
was. He gets lost in his books and forgets about meetings he himself
called. He only dresses with any sense of fashion because a
Terriswoman bought him a new wardrobe. War has changed him some, but
on the inside, I think he's still just a dreamer caught in a world
with too much violence.
"And Vin . . .
well, she really is different. I've never been sure what to
make of her. Sometimes, she seems as frail as a child. And then she
kills an Inquisitor. She can be fascinating and frightening at the
same time. I tried to court her once."
"Really?"
Beldre said, perking up.
Spook smiled. "I
gave her a handkerchief. I heard that's how you do it in noble
society."
"Only if
you're a romantic," Beldre said, smiling wistfully.
"Well, I gave
her one," Spook said. "But I don't think she knew what I
meant by it. And, of course, once she did figure it out, she
turned me down. I'm not sure what I was thinking, trying to court
her. I mean, I'm just Spook. Quiet, incomprehensible, forgettable
Spook."
He closed his eyes.
What am I saying? Women didn't want to hear men talk about
how insignificant they were. He'd heard that much. I shouldn't
have come to talk to her. I should have just gone about, giving
orders. Looking like I was in charge.
The damage had been
done, however. She knew the truth about him. He sighed, opening his
eyes.
"I don't think
you're forgettable," Beldre said. "Of course, I'd be more
likely to think fondly of you if you were to let me go."
Spook smiled.
"Eventually. I promise."
"Are you going
to use me against him?" Beldre asked. "Threaten to kill me
if he doesn't give in?"
"Threats like
that are hollow if you know you'll never do what you say," Spook
said. "Honestly, Beldre, I'm not going to hurt you. In fact,
I've got a feeling you'll be safer here than back in your brother's
palace."
"Please don't
kill him, Spook," Beldre said. "Maybe . . . maybe you can
help him somehow, help him see that he's being too extreme."
Spook nodded. "I'll
. . . try."
"Do you
promise?" she said.
"All right,"
Spook said. "I promise to at least try to save your brother. If
I can."
"And the city
too."
"And the
city," Spook said. "Trust me. We've done this before—the
transition will go smoothly."
Beldre nodded, and
she actually seemed to believe him. What kind of woman is still
able to trust people after everything she's been through? If
she'd been Vin, she would have stabbed him in the back at the first
opportunity, and that would have probably been the right thing to do.
Yet, this girl just continued to trust. It was like finding a
beautiful plant growing alone in a field of burnt ash.
"Once we're
done, maybe you could introduce me to the emperor and empress,"
Beldre said. "They sound like interesting people."
"I'll never
argue with that statement," Spook said. "Elend and Vin . .
. well, they're certainly interesting. Interesting people
with heavy burdens. Sometimes, I wish I were powerful enough to do
important works like them."
Beldre laid a hand
on his arm, and he glanced down, a bit surprised. What?
"Power can be
a terrible thing, Spook," she said quietly. "I'm . . . not
pleased with what it's done to my brother. Don't wish so hard for
it."
Spook met her eyes,
then nodded and rose. "If you need anything, ask Sazed. He'll
see to your comforts."
She looked up.
"Where are you going?"
"To be seen."
"I want
primary trade contracts on all the canals," Durn said. "And
a title from the emperor."
"You?"
Spook said. "A title? You think a 'lord' in front of your name
is going to make that face any less ugly?"
Durn raised an
eyebrow.
Spook just
chuckled. "Both are yours. I cleared it with Sazed and
Breeze—they'll even draft you a contract, if you want."
Durn nodded
appreciatively. "I do. Lords pay attention to things like that."
They sat in one of his many backroom chambers—not in his
private home, but in a place attached to a particular inn. An old set
of drums hung on the wall.
Spook had had
little trouble sneaking out past Quellion's soldiers standing watch
at the front of the Ministry building. Even before he'd gained
enhanced abilities with tin, and long before he'd been able to burn
pewter, he'd learned to sneak about in the night and spy. A group of
soldiers had barely posed an obstacle for him. He couldn't remain
cooped up in the cavern like the others. He had too much work to do.
"I want the
Harrows dammed off," Spook said. "We'll flood the canals
during the evening, when the markets are empty. Nobody lives in the
streetslots except for those of you here in the slums. If you want to
keep this place from flooding, you'll need a good watertight
blockade in place."
"Already taken
care of," Durn said. "When the Harrows were new, we pulled
off the lock system from its mouth, but I know where it is. It'll fit
back in place well enough to keep the water out, assuming we can
install it correctly."
"You'd
better," Spook said. "I don't want the deaths of half the
city's beggar population on my conscience. I'll warn you the day we
intend to pull this off. See if you can get some of the goods out of
the market, as well as keep people out of the streetslots. That, plus
what you're doing for my reputation, will guarantee you the title you
want."
Durn nodded,
rising. "Well, let's go work on that reputation, then." He
led the way out of the back room, bringing Spook out into the commons
of the bar. As always, Spook wore his burned cloak—it had
become something of a symbol for him. He'd never worn a mistcloak,
but somehow, this felt even better.
The people rose
when he entered. He smiled, motioning for Durn's men to bring out
wineskins—stolen from the storage cavern and carried by Spook
as he snuck out several nights in a row. "Tonight," he
said, "you don't have to pay for Quellion's stolen liquor.
That's his way of keeping you happy and content."
And that was the
only speech he gave. He wasn't Kelsier, able to impress people with
his words. Instead—at Breeze's suggestion—he stayed
mostly quiet. He visited tables, trying to not be aloof, but also
speaking little. He looked thoughtful, and asked the people about
their problems. He listened to stories of loss and hardship, and
drank with them to the memory of those Quellion had murdered. And,
with his pewter, he never got drunk. He already had a reputation for
that—the people regarded it mystically, as they did his ability
to survive fire.
After that bar,
they visited another, and another after that, Durn careful to keep
him to the safest—and yet most populated—of the
locations. Some were in the Harrows, others were above. Through it
all, Spook felt an amazing thing: his confidence growing. He really
was a little like Kelsier. Vin might have been the one
trained by the Survivor, but Spook was the one who was doing just
what he'd done—encouraging the people, leading them to rise up
for their own sakes.
As the evening
passed, the various bars became a blur. Spook breathed curses against
Quellion, speaking of the murders and of the Allomancers the Citizen
retained. Spook didn't spread the rumors that Quellion was himself an
Allomancer—he let Breeze do that more carefully. That way, it
wouldn't look like Spook was too eager to set the man up.
"To the
Survivor!"
Spook looked up,
holding his mug of wine, smiling as the bar patrons cheered.
"To the
Survivor!" another said, pointing at Spook. "Survivor of
the Flames!"
"To the death
of the Citizen!" Durn said, raising his own mug—though he
rarely drank from it. "Down with the man who said he'd let us
rule, then took it all for himself!"
Spook smiled,
taking a drink. He hadn't realized how exhausting it could be to
simply sit around and speak to people. His flared pewter kept his
body's weariness at bay, but it couldn't prevent the mental fatigue.
I wonder what
Beldre would think if she saw this , he thought. The men
cheering me. She'd be impressed, wouldn't she? She'd forget about how
I droned on about how useless I was .
Perhaps the visits
to the bars had been fatiguing simply because he had something else
he wished he could be doing. It was silly—she was his captive.
He'd betrayed her trust. She was obviously just warming up to him in
an effort to get him to let her go. Yet, he couldn't help thinking
back to their conversation, going over it again and again in his
mind. Despite the stupid things he'd said, she'd laid her hand on his
arm. That meant something, didn't it?
"You all
right?" Durn asked, leaning in. "That's your tenth mug
tonight."
"I'm fine,"
Spook said.
"You were
looking a little distant there."
"I have a lot
on my mind," Spook said.
Durn leaned back,
frowning, but didn't say anything more.
Some things about
his conversation with Beldre bothered Spook, even more than his own
stupid comments. She seemed to really be worried by the things that
her brother had done. When Spook himself was in power, would she see
him as she did Quellion? Would that be a bad thing, or a good thing?
She already said they were similar.
Power can be a
terrible thing . . . .
He looked up,
glancing at the people of the bar as they cheered him again, just as
the men had in the other bars. Kelsier had been able to handle
adulation like this. If Spook wanted to be like Kelsier, then he'd
have to deal with it as well, right?
Wasn't it a good
thing to be liked? To have people willing to follow him? He could
finally break away from the old Spook. He could stop being that boy,
the one so insignificant and easily forgotten. He could leave that
child behind, and become a man who was respected. And why shouldn't
he be respected? He wasn't that boy anymore. He wore his
bandages across his eyes, heightening his mystical reputation as a
man who did not need light to see. Some even said that anywhere that
fire burned, Spook could see.
"They love
you," Kelsier whispered. "You deserve it."
Spook smiled. That
was all the confirmation he needed. He stood, raising his arms before
the crowd. They cheered in response.
It had been a long
time coming. And it felt all the sweeter for the wait.

Preservation's
desire to create sentient life was what eventually broke the
stalemate. In order to give mankind awareness and independent
thought, Preservation knew that he would have to give up part of
himself—his own soul—to dwell within mankind. This would
leave him just a tiny bit weaker than his opposite, Ruin .
That tiny bit
seemed inconsequential, compared with their total vast sums of power.
However, over aeons, this tiny flaw would allow Ruin to overcome
Preservation, thereby bringing an end to the world .
This, then, was
their bargain. Preservation got mankind, the only creations that had
more Preservation than Ruin in them, rather than a balance.
Independent life that could think and feel. In exchange, Ruin was
given a promise—and proof—that he could bring an end to
all they had created together. It was the pact .
And
Preservation eventually broke it .





54
WHEN VIN
AWOKE, she was not surprised to find herself bound. She was
surprised to feel that she was wearing metal manacles.
The first thing she
did—even before she opened her eyes—was reach inside for
her metals. With steel and iron, perhaps she could use the manacles
as weapons. With pewter . . .
Her metals were
gone.
She kept her eyes
closed, trying not to display the panic she felt, thinking through
what had happened. She'd been in the cavern, trapped with Ruin.
Elend's friend had come in, given her the wine, and she'd taken it.
Gambled.
How long had it
been since she'd fallen unconscious?
"Your
breathing has changed," a voice reported. "You are
obviously awake."
Vin cursed herself
quietly. There was a very easy way to take away an Allomancer's
powers—easier, even, than making them burn aluminum. You just
had to keep them drugged long enough for them to pass the metals
through their body. As she thought about it, her mind shrugging off
the effects of extended sleep, she realized this was what must have
happened to her.
The silence
continued. Finally, Vin opened her eyes. She expected to see cell
bars. Instead, she saw a sparsely furnished, utilitarian room. She
lay on a bench, head cushioned by a hard pillow. Her manacles were
connected to a chain several feet long, which was in turn locked to
the base of the bench. She tugged on the chain carefully, and
determined that it was very well affixed.
The motion drew the
attention of a pair of guards who stood beside the bench. They jumped
slightly, raising staffs and eyeing her warily. Vin smiled to
herself; part of her was proud that she could evoke such a response
even when chained and metalless.
"You, Lady
Venture, present something of a problem." The voice came from
the side. Vin raised herself up on one arm, looking over the bench's
armrest. On the other side of the room—perhaps fifteen feet
away—a bald figure in robes stood with his back to her. He
stared out a large window, facing west, and the setting sun was a
violent crimson blaze around his silhouette.
"What do I
do?" Yomen asked, still not turning toward her. "A single
flake of steel, and you could slaughter my guards with their own
buttons. A taste of pewter, and you could lift that bench and smash
your way out of the room. The logical thing to do would be to gag
you, keep you drugged at all times, or kill you."
Vin opened her
mouth to reply, but all that came out was a cough. She immediately
tried to burn pewter to strengthen her body. The lack of metal was
like missing a limb. As she sat up, coughing further and growing
dizzy, she found herself craving the metal more than she'd imagined
that she ever would. Allomancy wasn't supposed to be addictive, not
like certain herbs or poisons. However, at that moment, she could
have sworn that all the scientists and philosophers were flat-out
wrong.
Yomen made a sharp
gesture with one arm, still not turning from the sunset. A servant
approached, bearing a cup for Vin. She eyed it uncertainly.
"If I wanted
to poison you, Lady Venture," Yomen said without turning, "I
could do it without guile."
Good point ,
Vin thought wryly, accepting the cup and drinking the water it
contained.
"Water,"
Yomen said. "Collected from rain, then strained and purified.
You will find no trace metals in it to burn. I specifically ordered
it kept in wooden containers only."
Clever ,
Vin thought. Years before she'd become consciously aware of her
Allomantic powers, she'd been burning the tiny bits of metal she
haphazardly got from groundwater or dining utensils.
The water quenched
her thirst and stilled her cough. "So," she finally said,
"if you're so worried about me eating metals, why leave me
ungagged?"
Yomen stood quietly
for a moment. Finally, he turned, and she could see the tattoos
across his eyes and face, his skin reflecting the deep colors of the
falling sun outside. On his forehead, he wore his single, silvery
bead of atium.
"Various
reasons," said the obligator king.
Vin studied him,
then raised the cup to take another drink. The motion jangled her
manacles, which she eyed in annoyance as they again restricted her
movement.
"They're made
of silver," Yomen said. "A particularly frustrating metal
for Mist-born, or so I am told."
Silver. Useless,
unburnable silver. Like lead, it was one of the metals that provided
no Allomantic powers at all.
"An unpopular
metal indeed . . ." Yomen said, nodding to the side. A servant
approached Vin, bearing something on a small platter. Her mother's
earring. It was a dull thing, Allomantically, made of bronze with
some silver plating. Much of the gilding had worn off years ago, and
the brownish bronze showed through, making the earring look to be the
cheap bauble it was.
"Which is
why," Yomen continued, "I am so curious as to why you would
bother with an ornament such as this. I have had it tested. Silver on
the outside, bronze on the inside. Why those metals? One useless to
Allomancers, the other granting what is considered the weakest of
Allomantic powers. Would not an earring of steel or of pewter make
more sense?"
Vin eyed the
earring. Her fingers itched to grab it, if only to feel metal between
her fingers. If she'd had steel, she could have Pushed on the
earring, using it as a weapon. Kelsier had once told her to keep
wearing it for that simple reason. Yet, it had been given to her by
her mother. A woman Vin had never known. A woman who had tried to
kill her.
Vin snatched the
earring. Yomen watched curiously as she stuck it in her ear. He
seemed . . . wary. As if waiting for something.
If I really did
have some trick planned , she thought, he'd be dead in an
instant. How can he stand there so calmly? Why give me my earring?
Even if it isn't made of useful metals, I might find a way to use it
against him .
Her instincts told
her he was trying an old street ploy—kind of like throwing your
enemy a dagger to make him attack. Yomen wanted to spring any traps
she was planning. It seemed a silly move. How could he possibly hope
to best a Mistborn?
Unless he
himself is a Mistborn , Vin thought. He feels he can beat me
.
He has atium,
and is ready to burn it when I try something .
Vin did nothing;
made no attack. She wasn't certain if her instincts about Yomen were
right, but that didn't really matter. She couldn't attack, for the
earring had no hidden secret. The truth was, she simply wanted it
back because it felt comfortable in her ear. She was accustomed to
wearing it.
"Interesting,"
Yomen said. "Regardless, you are about to discover one of the
reasons I have left you without a gag . . ." With that, he
raised a hand toward the door. He clasped his hands behind his back
as a servant opened the door, showing in an unarmed soldier in the
white and brown of Elend's livery.
You should kill
him , Ruin whispered in her mind. All of them .
"Lady
Venture," Yomen said without looking at her. "I must ask
you not to speak to this man except when I indicate, and answer only
as I request. Otherwise, he will have to be executed, and a fresh
messenger sent for from your army."
The soldier paled.
Vin just frowned, eyeing the obligator king. Yomen was obviously a
calm man, and he wanted to appear harsh. How much of it was an act?
"You can see
that she is alive, as promised," Yomen said to the soldier.
"How do we
know this is not a kandra in disguise?" the soldier asked.
"You can ask
your question," Yomen said.
"Lady
Venture," the soldier said, "what did you have for dinner
the night before you went to the party inside the city?"
It was a good
question to ask. A kandra would have interrogated her about important
moments—such as her first meeting with Elend. Something like a
meal, however, was so random that no kandra would have thought to ask
about it. Now, if Vin could remember. . . .
She looked at
Yomen. He nodded—she could answer. "Eggs," she said.
"Fresh eggs that I bought in the city, during one of my spying
trips."
The man nodded.
"You have your
answer, soldier," Yomen said. "Report to your king that his
wife is still alive."
The soldier
withdrew and the servants closed the door. Vin sat back on the bench,
waiting for a gag.
Yomen remained
where he was, looking at her.
Vin looked back.
Finally, she spoke. "How long do you think that you can keep
Elend placated? If you know anything of him at all, then you will
realize that he is a king first, and a man second. He will do what he
needs to do, even if it means my death."
"Eventually,
perhaps," Yomen said. "However, for now, the stall is
effective. They say that you are a blunt woman, and appreciate
brevity. Therefore, I will be straightforward with you. My purpose in
capturing you was not to use you as leverage against your husband."
"Is that so,"
she said flatly. "Why did you capture me, then?"
"It is simple,
Lady Venture," Yomen said. "I captured you so that I could
execute you."
If he expected
surprise from her, she didn't give it. She just shrugged. "Sounds
like an unnecessarily formal term. Why not just cut my throat while I
was drugged?"
"This city is
a place of law," Yomen said. "We do not kill
indiscriminately."
"This is war,"
Vin said. "If you wait for 'discrimination' before you kill,
you'll have a lot of unhappy soldiers."
"Your crime is
not one of war, Lady Venture."
"Oh? And am I
to know this crime, then?"
"It is the
most simple of all crimes. Murder."
Vin raised an
eyebrow. Had she killed someone close to this man? Perhaps one of the
noble soldiers in Cett's retinue, back a year ago when she'd
assaulted Keep Hasting?
Yomen met her eyes,
and she saw something in them. A loathing that he kept hidden behind
the calm front. No, she hadn't killed one of his friends or
relatives. She'd killed someone far more important to him.
"The Lord
Ruler," she said.
Yomen turned away
again.
"You can't
honestly intend to try me for that," Vin said. "It's
ridiculous."
"There will be
no trial," Yomen said. "I am the authority in this city,
and need no ceremony to give me direction or permission."
Vin snorted. "I
thought you said this was a place of law."
"And I am that
law," Yomen said calmly. "I believe in letting a person
speak for themselves before I make my decision. I will give you time
to prepare your thoughts—however, the men who will be guarding
you have orders to kill you if it ever looks like you are putting
something unapproved into your mouth."
Yomen glanced back
at her. "I'd be very careful while I eat or drink, if I were
you. Your guards have been told to err on the side of safety, and
they know that I will not punish them if they accidentally kill you."
Vin paused, cup of
water still held lightly in her fingers.
Kill him ,
Ruin's voice whispered. You could do it. Take a weapon from one
of those soldiers, then use it on Yomen .
Vin frowned. Ruin
still used Reen's voice—it was familiar, something that had
always seemed a part of her. Discovering that it belonged to that
thing . . . it was like finding out that her reflection
really belonged to someone else, and that she'd never actually seen
herself.
She ignored the
voice. She wasn't sure why Ruin would want her to try killing Yomen.
After all, Yomen had captured her—the obligator king was
working on Ruin's side. Plus, Vin doubted her ability to cause the
man any harm. Chained, lacking offensive metals . . . she'd be a fool
to attack.
She also didn't
trust Yomen's comments about keeping her alive so that she could
"speak" in her defense. He was up to something. Yet, she
couldn't fathom what it might be. Why leave her alive? He was too
clever a man to lack a reason.
Giving no hint of
his motivations, Yomen turned away from her again, looking back out
his window. "Take her away."

By sacrificing
most of his consciousness, Preservation created Ruin's prison,
breaking their deal and trying to keep Ruin from destroying what they
had created. This event left their powers again nearly balanced—Ruin
imprisoned, only a trace of himself capable of leaking out.
Preservation reduced to a mere wisp of what he once was, barely
capable of thought and action .
These two minds
were, of course, independent of the raw force of their powers.
Actually, I am uncertain of how thoughts and personalities came to be
attached to the powers in the first place—but I believe they
were not there originally. For both powers could be detached from the
minds that ruled them .




55
IT TOOK
ELEND MUCH LONGER to get back from the village than it had
taken to get there. For one thing, he had left a lot of his coins
with the villagers. He wasn't certain how much good money would do
them in the coming weeks, but he'd felt that he had to do something.
They were going to have a rough time of it the next few months. Their
food stores nearly depleted, their homes burned by koloss, their
water sources contaminated by ash, their capital—and
king—besieged by Elend himself . . .
I have to stay
focused , he told himself, walking through the falling ash. I
can't help every village. I have to worry about the larger picture .
A picture that
included using a force of koloss to destroy another man's city. Elend
gritted his teeth, continuing to walk. The sun was creeping toward
the horizon, and the mists had already started to appear, lit by the
blazing fire of red sunlight. Behind him tromped some thirty thousand
koloss. His new army.
That was another
reason it took him a bit longer to get back. He wanted to walk with
the koloss army, rather than jumping ahead of them, in case their
Inquisitor appeared to steal them back. He still couldn't believe
that such a large group hadn't been under any kind of direction.
I attacked a
koloss army on my own , he thought as he slogged through a patch
of thigh-deep ash. I did it without Vin's help, intent on
defeating their Inquisitor by myself .
How had he thought
to fight an Inquisitor on his own? Kelsier himself had only barely
been able to defeat one of the things.
Vin has killed
three now , he thought. We took them on together, but she
was the one who killed each one .
He didn't begrudge
her the abilities she had, but he did feel occasional glimmers of
envy. That amused him. It had never bothered him when he'd been an
ordinary man, but now that he was Mistborn too, he found himself
coveting her skill.
And even with her
skill, she had been captured. Elend tromped along, feeling a weight
he couldn't shake. Everything just seemed wrong to him. Vin
imprisoned, while he was free. Mist and ash suffocating the land.
Elend, despite all his powers, was unable to do anything to protect
the people—and the woman—he loved.
And that was the
third reason that he walked ploddingly with his koloss, rather than
returning immediately to his camp. He needed some time to think. Some
time alone. Perhaps that was what had driven him to leave in the
first place.
He'd known that
their work was dangerous, but he'd never really thought that
he might lose her. She was Vin. She always got out. She survived.
But what if, this
time, she didn't?
He'd always been
the vulnerable one—the common person in a world of Mist-born
and koloss. The scholar who couldn't fight, who had to depend on Vin
for protection. Even during the last year of fighting, she'd stayed
close to him. If she'd been in danger, he'd been in danger, and there
hadn't really been time to think about what would happen if he
survived and she didn't.
He shook his head,
pushing through the ash. He could have used koloss to force a trail
for him. For the moment, however, he wanted to be apart even from
them. So, he walked ahead, a lone figure in black on a field of solid
ash backlit by a setting red sun.
The ashfalls were
getting far worse. Before he'd left the village, he'd spent a day
having his koloss clear the streets and rebuild some of the homes.
Yet, with the rate at which the ash was falling, the mist and even
the possibility of other wandering koloss were becoming secondary
problems. The ash. It alone would kill them. Already, it
buried trees and hills. It was up to his waist in places.
Perhaps if I'd
stayed in Luthadel , he thought, working with my scholars,
we could have discovered a way to stop this . . . .
No, that was
foolish. What would they do? Plug the ashmounts? Find a way to wash
all of the ash out into the sea? In the distance ahead of him through
the evening mists, he could see a red glow in the sky, even though
the sun set on the opposite horizon. He could only assume that the
light to the east came from fire and lava rising out of the
ashmounts.
What did he do
about a dying sky, ash so thick he could barely move through it, and
erupting volcanoes? So far, his way of dealing with these things had
been to ignore them.
Or, rather, to let
Vin worry about them.
That's really
what has me worried , he thought. Losing the woman I love is
bad enough. But, losing the one I trusted to fix all this . . .
that's truly frightening .
It was an odd
realization. The deep truth was, he really did trust Vin as
more than a person. She was more like a force. Almost a god, even? It
seemed silly, thinking about that directly. She was his wife. Even if
he was a member of the Church of the Survivor, it felt wrong to
worship her, to think her divine.
And he didn't, not
really. But he did trust her. Vin was a person of instinct, while
Elend was one of logic and thought. Sometimes, it seemed she could do
the impossible simply because she didn't stop to think about
how impossible it really was. If Elend came to a cliff, he stopped,
gauging the distance to the other side. Vin just jumped.
What would happen
on the day she didn't reach the other side? What if the events they
were tied up in were bigger than two people could hope to solve, even
if one of those people was Vin? As he considered it, even the
possibility of discovering helpful information in the cache at Fadrex
had been a slim hope.
We need help ,
Elend thought with frustration. He stopped in the ash, the darkness
closing around him as night proper finally fell. The mists swirled.
Help. So, what did
that mean? Help from some mysterious god like the ones that Sazed had
once preached about? Elend had never known a god other than the Lord
Ruler. And he'd never really had faith in that creature—though,
meeting Yomen had changed his perspective on how some people
worshipped the Lord Ruler.
Elend stood,
looking up at the sky, watching the flakes of ash fall. Continuing
their silent, yet ceaseless, barrage against the land. Like the raven
feathers of a soft pillow used to suffocate a sleeping victim.
We are doomed ,
he thought. Behind him, the koloss stopped their march, waiting upon
his silent order. That's it. It's all going to end .
The realization
wasn't crushing. It was gentle, like a final tendril of smoke from a
dying candle. He suddenly knew that they couldn't fight—that
everything they'd done over the last year had been pointless.
Elend slumped to
his knees. The ash came up to his chest. Perhaps this was one final
reason why he'd wanted to walk home alone. When others were around,
he felt as if he had to be optimistic. But, alone, he could face the
truth.
And there, in the
ash, he finally just gave up.
Someone knelt down
beside him.
Elend jumped
backward, scrambling to his feet and scattering ash. He flared pewter
belatedly, giving himself the tense strength of a Mistborn about to
attack. But, there was nobody beside him. He froze, wondering if he'd
been imagining things. And then, burning tin and squinting in the
darkness of the ashen night, he finally saw it. A creature of mist.
It wasn't really
composed of mist. Rather, it was outlined in mist. The
random shiftings suggested its figure, which was roughly that of a
man. Elend had seen this creature twice before. The first time, it
had appeared to him in the wilderness of the Northern Dominance.
The second time, it
had stabbed him in the gut, leaving him to bleed to death.
Yet, that had been
an attempt to get Vin to take the power at the Well of Ascension and
use it to heal Elend. The thing's intentions had been good, even if
it had nearly killed Elend. Plus, Vin said that this creature had led
her to the bit of metal that had somehow turned Elend into an
Allomancer.
The mist spirit
watched him, its figure barely distinguishable in the patterns of
flowing mists.
"What?"
Elend asked. "What do you want of me?"
The mist spirit
raised its arm and pointed to the northeast.
That's what it
did the first time it met me. It just pointed, as if trying to get me
to go somewhere. I didn't understand what it meant then either
.
"Look,"
Elend said, suddenly feeling exhausted. "If you want to say
something, why not just say it?"
The mist spirit
stood quietly in the mists.
"At least
write it," Elend said. "The pointing just isn't working."
He knew that the creature—whatever it was—had some
corporeality. After all, it had managed to stab Elend handily enough.
He expected the
creature to just continue standing there. However, to Elend's
surprise, it followed the command, kneeling down in the ash. It
reached out with a misty hand, and began to scratch in the ash. Elend
took a step forward, cocking his head to see what the thing was
writing.
I will kill you
, the words said. Death, death, death .
"Well . . .
that's pleasant," Elend said, feeling an eerie chill.
The mist spirit
seemed to slump. It knelt in the ash, making no impression in the
ground.
Such odd words
to write , Elend thought, when it seemed to be trying to get
me to trust it . . . "It can change your words, can't it?"
Elend asked. "The other force. It can rewrite pieces of text on
paper, so why not things scratched in ash?"
The mist spirit
looked up.
"That's why
you ripped the corners off of Sazed's papers," Elend said. "You
couldn't write him a note, because the words would just get changed.
So, you had to do other things. More blunt things—like
pointing."
The creature stood.
"So, write
more slowly," Elend said. "Use exaggerated motions. I'll
watch the movements of your arm, and form the letters in my mind."
The mist spirit
began immediately, waving its arms about. Elend cocked his head,
watching its motions. He couldn't make any sense of them, let alone
form letters out of them.
"Wait,"
he said, holding up a hand. "That isn't working. Either it's
changing things, or you just don't know your letters."
Silence.
Wait ,
Elend thought, glancing at the text on the ground. If the text
changed . . .
"It's here,
isn't it," he said, feeling a sudden and icy chill. "It's
here with us now."
The mist spirit
remained still.
"Bounce around
for a yes," Elend said.
The mist spirit
began to wave its arms as it had before.
"Close
enough," Elend said, shivering. He glanced around, but could see
nothing else in the mists. If the thing Vin had released was there,
then it made no impression. Yet, Elend thought he could feel
something different. A slight increase in wind, a touch of ice in the
air, the mists moving about more agitatedly. Perhaps he was just
imagining things.
He focused his
attention back on the mist spirit. "You're . . . not as solid as
you were before."
The creature
remained still.
"Is that a
no?" Elend said, frustrated. The creature remained still.
Elend closed his
eyes. Forcing himself to focus, thinking back to the logic puzzles of
his youth. I need to approach this more directly. Use questions
that can be answered with a simple yes or no. Why would the mist
spirit be harder to see now than before? Elend opened his eyes.
"Are you
weaker than you were before?" he asked.
The thing waved its
arms.
Yes ,
Elend thought.
"Is it because
the world is ending?" Elend asked.
More waving.
"Are you
weaker than the other thing? The thing Vin set free?"
Waving.
"A lot
weaker?" Elend asked.
It waved, though it
seemed a bit disconsolate this time.
Great ,
Elend thought. Of course, he could have guessed that. Whatever the
mist spirit was, it wasn't a magical answer to their problems. If it
were, it would have saved them by now.
What we lack
most is information , Elend thought. I need to learn what I
can from this thing .
"Are you
related to the ash?" he asked.
No motion.
"Are you
causing the ashfalls?" he asked.
No motion.
"Is the other
thing causing the ashfalls?"
This time, it
waved.
Okay . "Is
it causing the mists to come in the day too?"
No motion.
"Are you
causing the mists to come in the day?"
It seemed to pause
in thought at this one, then it waved about less vigorously than
before.
Is that a
"maybe"? Elend wondered. Or a "partially"?
The creature fell
still. It was getting harder and harder to see it in the mists. Elend
flared his tin, but that didn't make the creature any more distinct.
It seemed to be . . . fading.
"Where was it
you wanted me to go?" Elend asked, more for himself than
expecting an answer. "You pointed . . . east? Did you want me to
go back to Luthadel?"
It waved with
half-enthusiasm again.
"Do you want
me to attack Fadrex City?"
It stood still.
"Do you not
want me to attack Fadrex City?"
It waved
vigorously.
Interesting ,
he thought.
"The mists,"
Elend said. "They're connected to all this, aren't they?"
Waving.
"They're
killing my men," Elend said.
It stepped forward,
then stood still, somehow looking urgent.
Elend frowned. "You
reacted to that. You mean to say they aren't killing my
men?"
It waved.
"That's
ridiculous. I've seen the men fall dead."
It stepped forward,
pointing at Elend. He glanced down at his sash. "The coins?"
he asked, looking up.
It pointed again.
Elend reached into his sash. All that was there were his metal vials.
He pulled one out. "Metals?"
It waved
vigorously. It just continued to wave and wave. Elend looked down at
the vial. "I don't understand."
The creature fell
still. It was getting more and more vague, as if it were evaporating.
"Wait!"
Elend said, stepping forward. "I have another question. One more
before you go!"
It stared him in
the eyes.
"Can we beat
it?" Elend asked softly. "Can we survive?"
Stillness. Then,
the creature waved just briefly. Not a vigorous wave—more of a
hesitant one. An uncertain one. It evaporated, maintaining that same
wave, the mists becoming indistinct and leaving no sign that the
creature had been there.
Elend stood in the
darkness. He turned and glanced at his koloss army, who waited like
the trunks of dark trees in the distance. Then he turned back,
scanning for any further signs of the mist spirit. Finally, he just
turned and began to tromp his way back to Fadrex. The koloss
followed.
He felt . . .
stronger. It was silly—the mist spirit hadn't really given him
any useful information. It had been almost like a child. The things
it had told him were mostly just confirmations of what he'd already
suspected.
Yet, as he walked,
he moved with more determination. If only because he knew there were
things in the world he didn't understand—and that meant,
perhaps, there were possibilities he didn't see. Possibilities for
survival.
Possibilities to
land safely on the other side of the chasm, even when logic told him
not to jump.

I don't know
why Preservation decided to use his last bit of life appearing to
Elend during his trek back to Fadrex. From what I understand, Elend
didn't really learn that much from the meeting. By then, of course,
Preservation was but a shadow of himself—and that shadow was
under immense destructive pressure from Ruin .
Perhaps
Preservation—or, the remnants of what he had been—wanted
to get Elend alone. Or, perhaps he saw Elend kneeling in that field,
and knew that the emperor of men was very close to just lying down in
the ash, never to rise again. Either way, Preservation did appear,
and in doing so exposed himself to Ruin's attacks. Gone were the days
when Preservation could turn away an Inquisitor with a bare gesture,
gone—even—were the days when he could strike a man down
to bleed and die .
By the time
Elend saw the "mist spirit," Preservation must have been
barely coherent. I wonder what Elend would have done, had he known
that he was in the presence of a dying god—that on that night,
he had been the last witness of Preservation's passing. If Elend had
waited just a few more minutes on that ashen field, he would have
seen a body—short of stature, black hair, prominent nose—fall
from the mists and slump dead into the ash .
As it was, the
corpse was left alone to be buried in ash. The world was dying. Its
gods had to die with it .





56
SPOOK STOOD
IN THE DARK CAVERN, looking at his board and paper. He had
it propped up, like an artist's canvas, though he wasn't sketching
images, but ideas. Kelsier had always outlined his plans for the crew
on a charcoal board. It seemed like a good idea, even though Spook
wasn't explaining plans to a crew, but rather trying to work them out
for himself.
The trick was going
to be getting Quellion to expose himself as an Allomancer before the
people. Durn had told them what to look for, and the crowds would be
ready, waiting for confirmation of what they had been told. However,
for Spook's plan to work, he'd have to catch the Citizen in a public
place, then get the man to use his powers in a way that was obvious
to those watching.
I can't let him
just Push on a distant metal, then , he thought, scratching a
note to himself on the charcoal board. I'll need him to shoot
into the air, or perhaps blast some coins. Something visible,
something we can tell everyone to watch for .
That would be
tough, but Spook was confident. He had several ideas scratched up on
the board, ranging from attacking Quellion at a rally to tricking him
into using his powers when he thought nobody was looking. Slowly, the
thoughts were jelling into a cohesive plan.
I really can
do this , Spook thought, smiling. I always felt such awe
for Kelsier's leadership abilities. But, it's not as hard as I
thought .
Or, at least, that
was what he told himself. He tried not to think about the
consequences of a failure. Tried not to think about the fact that he
still held Beldre hostage. Tried not to worry about the fact that
when he awoke some mornings—his tin having burned away during
the night—his body felt completely numb, unable to feel
anything until he got more metal as fuel. Tried not to focus on the
riots and incidents his appearances, speeches, and work among the
people were causing.
Kelsier kept
telling him not to worry. That should be enough for him. Shouldn't
it?
After a few
minutes, he heard someone approaching, footsteps quiet—but not
too quiet for him—on the stone. The rustle of a dress, yet
without perfume, let him know exactly who it was.
"Spook?"
He lowered the
charcoal and turned. Beldre stood at the far side of his "room."
He'd made himself an alcove between several of the storage shelves,
partitioned off with sheets—his own personal office. The
Citizen's sister wore a beautiful noble gown of green and white.
Spook smiled. "You
like the dresses?"
She looked down,
flushing slightly. "I . . . haven't worn anything like this in
years."
"Nobody in
this city has," Spook said, setting down the charcoal and wiping
his fingers on a rag. "But, then, that makes it pretty easy to
get them, if you know which buildings to loot. It looks like I
matched your size pretty well, eh?"
"Yes,"
she said quietly, drifting forward. The gown really did look good on
her, and Spook found it a little difficult to focus as she drew
closer. She eyed his charcoal board, then frowned. "Is . . .
that supposed to make any sense?"
Spook shook himself
free of his trance. The charcoal board was a mess of scratches and
notations. That, in itself, would have made it difficult enough to
read. There was, however, something else that made it even more
incomprehensible.
"It's mostly
written in Eastern street slang," Spook said.
"The language
you grew up speaking?" she said, fingering the board's edge,
careful not to touch the writing itself, lest she smudge it.
Spook nodded.
"Even the
words are different," she said. "Wasing?"
"It kind of
means 'was doing,' " Spook explained. "You start sentences
with it. 'Wasing the run of there' would mean 'I was running to that
place.' "
"Wasing the
where of how of the finds," Beldre said, smiling slightly to
herself as she read from the board. "It sounds like gibberish!"
"Wasing the
how of wanting the doing," Spook said, smiling, falling into a
full accent. Then he flushed, turning away.
"What?"
she asked.
Why do I always
act so foolish around her? he thought. The others always
made fun of my slang—even Kelsier thought it was silly. Now I
start speaking it before her?
He'd been feeling
confident and sure as he studied his plans before she arrived. Why
was it that the girl could always make him fall out of his leadership
role and go back to being the old Spook? The Spook who had never been
important.
"You shouldn't
be ashamed of the accent," Beldre said. "I think it's kind
of charming."
"You just said
it was gibberish," Spook said, turning back to her.
"But that's
the best part!" Beldre said. "It's gibberish on purpose,
right?"
Spook remembered
with fondness how his parents had responded to his adoption of the
slang. It had been a kind of power, being able to say things that
only his friends could understand. Of course, he'd started speaking
in it so much that it had been hard to switch back.
"So,"
Beldre said, eyeing the board. "What does it say?"
Spook hesitated.
"Just random thoughts," he said. She was his enemy—he
had to remember that.
"Oh," she
said. Something unreadable crossed her face, then she turned away
from the board.
Her brother
always banished her from his conferences , Spook thought. Never
told her anything important. Left her feeling like she was useless .
. . .
"I need to get
your brother to use his Allomancy in front of the people," Spook
found himself saying. "To let them see that he's a hypocrite."
Beldre looked back.
"The board is
filled with my ideas," Spook said. "Most of them aren't
very good. I'm kind of leaning toward just attacking him, making him
defend himself."
"That won't
work," Beldre said.
"Why not?"
"He won't use
Allomancy against you. He wouldn't expose himself like that."
"If I threaten
him strongly enough he will."
Beldre shook her
head. "You promised not to hurt him. Remember?"
"No,"
Spook said, raising a finger. "I promised to try to
find another way. And, I don't intend to kill him. I just need to
make him think that I'd kill him."
Beldre fell silent
again. His heart lurched.
"I won't do
it, Beldre," Spook said. "I won't kill him."
"You promise
that?"
Spook nodded.
She looked up at
him, then smiled. "I want to write him a letter. Perhaps I can
talk him into listening to you; we could avoid the need for this in
the first place."
"All right . .
." Spook said. "But, you realize I'll have to read the
letter to make certain you're not revealing anything that could hurt
my position."
Beldre nodded.
Of course, he'd do
more than read it. He'd rewrite it on another sheet of paper,
changing the line order, and then add a few unimportant words. He'd
worked on too many thieving crews to be unaware of ciphers. But,
assuming that Beldre was being honest with him, a letter from her to
Quellion was a good idea. It couldn't help but strengthen Spook's
position.
He opened his mouth
to ask whether or not her sleeping accommodations were acceptable,
but cut himself off as he heard someone approaching. Harder footsteps
this time. Captain Goradel, he guessed.
Sure enough, the
soldier appeared around the corner to Spook's "room" a
short time later.
"My lord,"
the soldier said. "You should see this."
The soldiers were
gone.
Sazed looked
through the window with the others, inspecting the empty plot of
ground where Quellion's troops had been camped for the last few
weeks, watching the Ministry building.
"When did they
leave?" Breeze asked, rubbing his chin thoughtfully.
"Just now,"
Goradel explained.
The move felt
ominous to Sazed for some reason. He stood beside Spook, Breeze, and
Goradel—though the others seemed to take the soldiers' retreat
as a good sign.
"Well, it will
make sneaking out easier," Goradel noted.
"More than
that," Spook said. "It means I can incorporate our own
soldiers in the plan against Quellion. We'd never have gotten them
out of the building secretly with half an army on our doorstep, but
now . . ."
"Yes,"
Goradel said. "But where did they go? Do you think Quellion is
suspicious of us?"
Breeze snorted.
"That, my dear man, sounds like a question for your scouts. Why
not have them search out where that army went?"
Goradel nodded. But
then, to Sazed's slight surprise, the soldier looked toward Spook for
a confirmation. Spook nodded, and the captain moved off to give the
orders.
He looks to the
boy over Breeze and I , Sazed thought. He shouldn't have been
surprised. Sazed himself had agreed to let Spook take the lead, and
to Goradel, all three of them—Sazed, Breeze, Spook—were
probably equal. All were in Elend's inner circle, and of the three,
Spook was the best warrior. It made sense for Goradel to look to him
as a source of authority.
It just felt
strange to see Spook giving orders to the soldiers. Spook had always
been so quiet during the days of the original crew. And yet, Sazed
was beginning to respect the boy too. Spook knew how to give orders
in a way that Sazed could not, and he had shown remarkable foresight
in his preparations in Urteau, as well as his plans to overthrow
Quellion. He had a flair for the dramatic that Breeze kept saying was
remarkable.
And yet, there was
that bandage on the boy's eyes, and the other things he hadn't
explained. Sazed knew that he should have pushed harder for answers,
but the truth was that he trusted Spook. Sazed had known Spook from
the lad's young teenage years, when he'd barely been capable of
communicating with others.
As Goradel moved
off, Spook looked to Sazed and Breeze. "Well?"
"Quellion is
planning something," Breeze said. "Seems too early to jump
to conclusions, though."
"I agree,"
Spook said. "For now, we go forward with the plan."
With that, they
split up. Sazed turned, making his way back down and over to the far
side of the cavern—to where a large group of soldiers worked in
an area well lit with lanterns. On his arms, he wore the familiar
weight of his copperminds—two on his forearms, two on his upper
arms. In them sat the knowledge of engineering he needed to complete
the task Spook had assigned him.
Lately, Sazed
didn't know what to think. Each time he climbed the ladder and looked
out over the city, he saw worse signs. The ashfalls were heavier. The
earthquakes were growing more and more frequent, and more and more
violent. The mists were lingering later and later in the day. The sky
grew dark, the red sun more like a vast bleeding scar than a source
of light and life. The ashmounts made the horizon red even during the
night.
It seemed to him
that the end of the world should be a time when men found
faith, not a time when they lost it. Yet, the little time that he'd
devoted to studying the religions in his portfolio had not been
encouraging. Twenty more religions eliminated, leaving just thirty
potential candidates.
He shook his head
to himself, moving among the toiling soldiers. Several groups worked
on wooden contraptions filled with rocks—weight systems that
would fall to block off the water running into the cavern. Others
worked on the system of pulleys that would lower the mechanism. After
about a half hour or so, Sazed determined that they were all doing
their tasks well, and returned to his calculations. However, as he
walked to his table, he saw Spook approaching him.
"Riots,"
Spook said, falling into step beside Sazed.
"Excuse me,
Lord Spook?"
"That's where
the soldiers went. Some people started a fire, and the soldiers
guarding us were needed to put it out before the whole city went up.
There's a lot more wood here than there is in Central Dominance
cities."
Sazed frowned. "Our
actions here are becoming dangerous, I fear."
Spook shrugged.
"Seems like a good thing to me. This city is on the edge of
snapping, Saze. Just like Luthadel was when we took control."
"Only the
presence of Elend Venture kept that city from destroying itself,"
Sazed said quietly. "Kelsier's revolution could easily have
turned into a disaster."
"It will be
all right," Spook said.
Sazed eyed the
young man as the two of them walked through the cavern. Spook seemed
to be trying very hard to project an air of confidence. Perhaps Sazed
was just growing cynical, but he found it difficult to be as
optimistic as Spook.
"You don't
believe me," Spook said.
"I'm sorry,
Lord Spook," Sazed said. "It's not that . . . it's just
that I seem to have trouble having faith in anything lately."
"Oh."
They walked
silently for a while, eventually finding themselves at the edge of
the glassy underground lake. Sazed paused beside the waters, his
worries chewing at his insides. He stood for a long moment, feeling
frustrated, but not really having an outlet.
"Don't you
even worry, Spook?" Sazed finally asked. "Worry that we'll
fail?"
"I don't
know," Spook said, shuffling.
"And, it's so
much more than this," Sazed said, waving back at the
work crews. "The very sky seems to be our enemy. The land is
dying. Don't you wonder what good any of this is? Why we even
struggle? We're all doomed anyway!"
Spook flushed.
Then, finally, he looked down. "I don't know," he repeated.
"I . . . I understand what you're doing, Sazed. You're trying to
find out if I doubt myself. I guess you can see through me."
Sazed frowned, but
Spook wasn't looking.
"You're
right," the young man said then, wiping his brow, "I do
wonder if I'll fail. I guess Tindwyl would be annoyed at me, wouldn't
she? She didn't think that leaders should doubt themselves."
That gave Sazed
pause. What am I doing? he thought, horrified at his
outburst. Is this what I've really become? During most of my
life, I resisted the Synod, rebelling against my own people. Yet, I
was at peace, confident that I was doing the right thing.
Now I come
here, where people need me most, and I just sit around and snap at my
friends, telling them that we're just going to die?
"But,"
Spook said, looking up, "though I doubt myself, I still think
we'll be all right."
Sazed was surprised
at the hope he saw in the boy's eyes. That's what I've lost.
"How can you
say that?" Sazed asked.
"I don't know,
really," Spook said. "I just . . . Well, do you remember
that question you asked me when you first got here? We were standing
by the lake, just over there. You asked me about faith. You asked
what good it was, if it just led people to hurt each other, like
Quellion's faith in the Survivor has done."
Sazed looked out
over the lake. "Yes," he said softly. "I remember."
"I've been
thinking about that ever since," Spook said. "And . . . I
think I might have an answer."
"Please."
"Faith,"
Spook said, "means that it doesn't matter what happens. You can
trust that somebody is watching. Trust that somebody will make it all
right."
Sazed frowned.
"It means that
there will always be a way," Spook whispered, staring forward,
eyes glazed, as if seeing things that Sazed could not.
Yes ,
Sazed thought. That is what I have lost. And it's what I need to
get back .

I have come to
see that each power has three aspects: a physical one, which can be
seen in the creations made by Ruin and Preservation; a spiritual one
in the unseen energy that permeates all of the world; and a cognitive
one in the minds which controlled that energy .
There is more
to this. Much more that even I do not yet comprehend .





57
YOU SHOULD
KILL THEM.
Vin looked up as
she heard a pair of guards pass the door to her cell. There was one
good thing about Ruin's voice—it tended to warn her when people
were nearby, even if it did always tell her to kill them.
A part of her did
wonder if, in fact, she was mad. After all, she saw and heard things
that nobody else could. However, if she were mad, there would really
be no way for her to realize it. So, she simply decided to accept
what she heard, and move on.
In truth, she was
glad for Ruin's voice on occasion. Other than Ruin, she was alone in
the cell. All was still. Even the soldiers did not speak—likely
at Yomen's orders. Plus, each time Ruin spoke, she felt as if she
learned something. For instance, she had learned that Ruin could
either manifest in person or affect her from a distance. When its
actual presence was not with her in the cell, Ruin's words were far
more simple and vague.
Take, for instance,
Ruin's order that she kill the guards. She couldn't follow that
suggestion, not from within the cell. It wasn't so much a specific
order as it was an attempt to change her inclinations. Again, that
reminded her of Allomancy, which could exert a general influence over
a person's emotions.
General
influence . . .
Something suddenly
occurred to her. She quested out, and—sure enough—she
could still feel the thousand koloss that Elend had given her. They
were under her control still, distant, obeying the general orders
she'd given them before.
Could she use them
somehow? Deliver a message to Elend, perhaps? Get them to attack the
city and free her? As she considered them, both plans seemed flawed.
Sending them to Fadrex would just get them killed, as well as risk
upsetting whatever plans Elend had for a potential attack. She could
send them to find Elend, but that would probably just get them killed
by the camp guards, who would be afraid they were bloodlusting. Plus,
what would she have them do if they did get to him? She could order
them to take actions, like attack or pick someone up, but she'd never
tried something as delicate as ordering one to speak certain words.
She tried forming
those words in her head and getting them to the koloss, but all she
sensed back was confusion. She'd have to work on that some more. And,
as she considered, she wondered if getting a message to Elend would
really be the best way to use them. It would let Ruin know about a
potential tool she had that, maybe, he hadn't noticed.
"I see that he
finally found a cell for you," a voice said.
Vin looked up, and
there he was. Still wearing Reen's form, Ruin stood in the small cell
with her. He maintained a straight-backed posture, standing almost
benevolently over her. Vin sat up on her cot. She'd never thought
that of all her metals, she would miss bronze so much. When Ruin
returned to visit in "person," burning bronze had let her
feel him via bronzepulses and gave her warning that he had arrived,
even if he didn't appear to her.
"I'll admit
that I'm disappointed in you, Vin," Ruin said. He used Reen's
voice, but he imbued it with a sense of . . . age. Of quiet wisdom.
The fatherly nature of that voice, mixed with Reen's face and her own
knowledge of the thing's desire to destroy, was disturbing.
"The last time
you were captured and locked away without metals," Ruin
continued, "not a night passed before you'd killed the Lord
Ruler and overthrown the empire. Now you've been soundly imprisoned
for what . . . a week now?"
Vin didn't respond.
Why come taunt me? Does it expect to learn something?
Ruin shook its
head. "I would have thought at the very least that you'd have
killed Yomen."
"Why are you
so concerned with his death?" Vin asked. "It seems to me
that he's on your side."
Ruin shook its
head, standing with hands clasped behind its back. "You still
don't understand, I see. You're all on my side, Vin. I
created you. You're my tools—each and every one of you. Zane,
Yomen, you, your dear Emperor Venture . . ."
"No. Zane was
yours, and Yomen is obviously misguided. But Elend . . . he'll fight
against you."
"But he
can't," Ruin said. "That's what you refuse to understand,
child. You cannot fight me, for by the mere act of fighting
you advance my goals."
"Evil men,
perhaps, help you," Vin said. "But not Elend. He's a good
person, and not even you can deny that."
"Vin, Vin. Why
can't you see? This isn't about good or evil. Morality doesn't even
enter into it. Good men will kill as quickly for what they want as
evil men—only the things they want are different."
Vin fell silent.
Ruin shook its
head. "I keep trying to explain. This process we are engaged in,
the end of all things—it's not a fight, but a simple
culmination of inevitability. Can any man make a pocket watch that
won't eventually wind down? Can you imagine a lantern that won't
eventually burn out? All things end. Think of me as a caretaker—the
one who watches the shop and makes certain that the lights are turned
out, that everything is cleaned up, once closing time arrives."
For a moment, he
made her question. There was some truth in his words, and seeing the
changes in the land these last few years—changes that started
before Ruin was even released—did make her wonder.
Yet, something
about the conversation bothered her. If what Ruin said was completely
true, then why did he care about her? Why return and speak to her?
"I guess that
you've won, then," she said quietly.
"Won?"
Ruin asked. "Don't you understand? There was nothing for me to
win, child. Things happen as they must."
"I see,"
Vin said.
"Yes, perhaps
you do," Ruin said. "I think that you just might
be able to." It turned and began to walk quietly from one side
of the cell toward the other. "You are a piece of me, you know.
Beautiful destroyer. Blunt and effective. Of all those I've claimed
over this brief thousand years, you are the only one I think just
might be able to understand me."
Why , Vin
thought, it's gloating! That's why Ruin is here—because it
wants to make certain that someone understands what it has
accomplished! There was a feeling of pride and victory in Ruin's
eyes. They were human emotions, emotions that Vin could understand.
At that moment,
Ruin stopped being an it in her mind, and instead became a
he.
Vin began to
think—for the first time—that she could find a way to
beat Ruin. He was powerful, perhaps even incomprehensible. But she
had seen humanity in him, and that humanity could be deceived,
manipulated, and broken. Perhaps it was this same conclusion that
Kelsier had drawn, after looking into the Lord Ruler's eyes that
fateful night when he had been captured. She finally felt as if she
understood him, and what it must have felt like to undertake
something so bold as the defeat of the Lord Ruler.
But Kelsier had
years to plan , Vin thought. I . . . I don't even know how
long I have. Not long, I would guess . Even as she thought,
another earthquake began. The walls trembled, and Vin heard guards
cursing in the hallway as something fell and broke. And Ruin . . . he
seemed to be in a state of bliss, his eyes closed, mouth open
slightly and looking pleasured as the building and city rumbled.
Eventually, all
fell still. Ruin opened his eyes, staring her down. "This work I
do, it's about passion, Vin. It's about dynamic events; it's
about change! That is why you and your Elend are so important to me.
People with passion are people who will destroy—for a man's
passion is not true until he proves how much he's willing to
sacrifice for it. Will he kill? Will he go to war? Will he break and
discard that which he has, all in the name of what he needs?"
It's not just
that Ruin feels that he's accomplished something , Vin thought,
he feels that he's overcome. Despite what he claims, he feels
that he's won—that he's defeated something . . . but who or
what? Us? We would be no adversary for a force like Ruin .
A voice from the
past seemed to whisper to her from long ago. What's the first
rule of Allomancy, Vin?
Consequence. Action
and reaction. If Ruin had power to destroy, then there was something
that opposed him. It had to be. Ruin had an opposite, an opponent.
Or, he once had.
"What did you
do to him?" Vin asked.
Ruin hesitated,
frowning as he turned toward her.
"Your
opposite," Vin said. "The one who once stopped you from
destroying the world."
Ruin was silent for
a long moment. Then he smiled, and Vin saw something chilling in that
smile. A knowledge that he was right. Vin was part of him.
She understood him.
"Preservation
is dead," Ruin said.
"You killed
him?"
Ruin shrugged.
"Yes, but no. He gave of himself to craft a cage. Though his
throes of agony have lasted several thousand years, now, finally, he
is gone. And the bargain has come to its fruition."
Preservation ,
Vin thought, a piece of a gigantic whole clicking into place. The
opposite of Ruin. A force like that couldn't have destroyed his
enemy, because he would represent the opposite of destruction. But
imprisonment, that would be within his powers .
Imprisonment
that ended when I gave up the power at the Well .
"And so you
see the inevitability," Ruin said softly.
"You couldn't
create it yourself, could you?" Vin asked. "The world,
life. You can't create, you can only destroy."
"He couldn't
create either," Ruin said. "He could only preserve.
Preservation is not creation."
"And so you
worked together," Vin said.
"Both with a
promise," Ruin said. "My promise was to work with him to
create you—life that thinks, life that loves."
"And his
promise?" Vin asked, fearing that she knew the answer.
"That I could
destroy you eventually," Ruin said softly. "And I have come
to claim what was promised me. The only point in creating something
is to watch it die. Like a story that must come to a climax, what I
have done will not be fulfilled until the end has arrived."
It can't be
true , Vin thought. Preservation. If he really represents a
power in the universe, then he couldn't really have been destroyed,
could he?
"I know what
you are thinking," Ruin said. "You cannot enlist
Preservation's power. He is dead. He couldn't kill me, you see. He
could only imprison me."
Yes. I figured
that last part out already. You really can't read my mind, can you?
Ruin continued. "It
was a villainous act, I must say. Preservation tried to escape our
bargain. Would you not call that an evil deed? It is as I said
before—good and evil have little to do with ruin or
preservation. An evil man will protect that which he desires as
surely as a good man."
But something
is keeping Ruin from destroying the world now , she thought. For
all his words about stories and endings, he is not a force that would
wait for an "appropriate" moment. There is more to this,
more that I'm not understanding .
What is holding
him back?
"I've come to
you," Ruin said, "because I want you, at least, to watch
and see. To know. For it has come."
Vin perked up.
"What? The end?"
Ruin nodded.
"How long?"
Vin asked.
"Days,"
Ruin said. "But not weeks."
Vin felt a chill,
realizing something. He had come to her, finally revealing himself,
because she was captured. He thought that there was no further chance
for mankind. He assumed that he had won.
Which means
that there is a way to beat him , she thought with
determination. And it involves me. But I can't do it here, or he
wouldn't have come to gloat .
And that meant she
had to get free. Quickly.

Once you begin
to understand these things, you can see how Ruin was trapped even
though Preservation's mind was gone, expended to create the prison.
Though Preservation's consciousness was mostly destroyed, his spirit
and body were still in force. And, as an opposite force of Ruin,
these could still prevent Ruin from destroying .
Or, at least,
keep him from destroying things too quickly. Once his mind was
"freed" from its prison the destruction accelerated quickly
.





58
"THROW
YOUR WEIGHT HERE," Sazed said, pointing at a wooden
lever. "The counterweights will fall, swinging down all four
floodgates and stemming the flow into the cavern. I warn you,
however—the explosion of water above will be rather
spectacular. We should be able to fill the city's canals in a matter
of hours, and I suspect that a portion of the northern city will be
flooded."
"To dangerous
levels?" Spook asked.
"I do not
think so," Sazed said. "The water will burst out through
the conduits in the interchange building beside us. I've inspected
the equipment there, and it appears sound. The water should
flow directly into the canals, and from there exit the city. Either
way, I would not want to be in those streetslots when this water
comes. The current will be quite swift."
"I've taken
care of that," Spook said. "Durn is going to make certain
the people know to be clear of the waterways."
Sazed nodded. Spook
couldn't help but be impressed. The complicated construct of wood,
gears, and wire looked like it should have taken months to build, not
weeks. Large nets of rocks weighed down the four gates, which hung,
ready to block off the river.
"This is
amazing, Saze," Spook said. "With a sign as spectacular as
the reappearance of the canal waters, the people will be certain
to listen to us instead of the Citizen." Breeze and Durn's men
had been working hard over the last few weeks, whispering to the
people to watch for a miracle from the Survivor of the Flames.
Something extraordinary, something to prove—once and for
all—who was the rightful master of the city.
"It is the
best I could do," Sazed said with a modest bow of the head. "The
seals won't be perfectly tight, of course. However, that should
matter little."
"Men?"
Spook said, turning to four of Goradel's soldiers. "You
understand what you are to do?"
"Yes, sir,"
the lead soldier said. "We wait for a messenger, then throw the
lever there."
"If no
messenger comes," Spook said, "throw the switch at
nightfall."
"And,"
Sazed said, raising a finger, "don't forget to twist the sealing
mechanism in the other room, plugging the water flow out of
this chamber. Otherwise, the lake will eventually empty. Better that
we keep this reservoir full, just in case."
"Yes, sir,"
the soldier said with a nod.
Spook turned,
looking back over the cavern. Soldiers bustled about, preparing. He
was going to need most of them for the night's activities. They
looked eager—they'd spent too long holed up in the cavern and
the building above. To the side, Beldre regarded Sazed's contraption
with interest. Spook broke away from the soldiers, approaching her
with a quick step.
"You're really
going to do it?" she said. "Return the water to the
canals?"
Spook nodded.
"I sometimes
imagined what it would be like to have the waters back," she
said. "The city wouldn't feel as barren—it would become
important, like it was during the early days of the Final Empire. All
those beautiful waterways. No more ugly gashes in the ground."
"It will be a
wonderful sight," Spook said, smiling.
Beldre just shook
her head. "It . . . amazes me that you can be such different
people at the same time. How can the man who would do such a
beautiful thing for my city also plan such destruction?"
"Beldre, I'm
not planning to destroy your city."
"Just its
government."
"I do what
needs to be done."
"Men say that
so easily," Beldre said. "Yet, everybody seems to have a
different opinion of what 'needs' to be done."
"Your brother
had his chance," Spook said.
Beldre looked down.
She still carried with her the letter they'd received earlier in the
day—a response from Quellion. Beldre's plea had been heartfelt,
but the Citizen had responded with insults, implying that she had
been forced to write the words because she was being held prisoner.
I do not fear a
usurper , the letter read. I am protected by the Survivor
himself. You will not have this city, tyrant .
Beldre looked up.
"Don't do it," she whispered. "Give him more time.
Please."
Spook hesitated.
"There is no
more time," Kelsier whispered. "Do what must be done."
"I'm sorry,"
Spook said, turning from her. "Stay with the soldiers—I'm
leaving four men to guard you. Not to keep you from fleeing, though
they will do that. I want you inside this cavern. I can't promise
that the streets will be safe."
He heard her
sniffle quietly behind him. He left her standing there, then walked
toward the gathering group of soldiers. One man brought Spook his
dueling canes and singed cloak. Goradel stood at the front of his
soldiers, looking proud. "We're ready, my lord."
Breeze walked up
beside him, shaking his head, dueling cane tapping the ground. He
sighed. "Well, here we go again. . . ."
The evening's
occasion was a speech Quellion had been publicizing for some time. He
had stopped executions recently, as if finally realizing that the
deaths were contributing to the instability of his rule. He
apparently intended to swing back toward benevolence, holding
rallies, emphasizing the wonderful things he was doing for the city.
Spook walked alone,
a little ahead of Breeze, Allrianne, and Sazed, who chatted behind.
Some of Goradel's soldiers followed as well, wearing common Urteau
garb. Spook had split their force, sending it by different paths. It
wasn't dark yet—to Spook the falling sun was bright, forcing
him to wear his blindfold and spectacles. Quellion liked to hold his
speeches in the evening, so that the mists arrived during them. He
liked the implied connection to the Survivor.
A figure hobbled
out of a side streetslot next to Spook. Durn walked with a stooped
posture, a cloak obscuring his figure. Spook respected the twisted
man's insistence on leaving the security of the Harrows, going out to
run jobs himself. Perhaps that was why he'd ended up as leader of the
city's underground.
"People are
gathering, as expected," Durn said, coughing quietly. "Some
of your soldiers are already there."
Spook nodded.
"Things are .
. . unsettled in the city," Durn said. "It worries me.
Segments I can't control have already started looting some of the
prohibited noble mansions. My men are all busy trying to get people
out of the streetslots."
"It will be
all right," Spook said. "Most of the populace will be at
the speech."
Durn was silent for
a moment. "Word is that Quellion is going to use his speech to
denounce you, then finally order an attack on the Ministry building
where you're staying."
"It's a good
thing we won't be there, then," Spook said. "He shouldn't
have withdrawn his soldiers, even if he did need them to
keep order in the city."
Durn nodded.
"What?"
Spook said.
"I just hope
you can handle this, lad. Once this night is through, the city will
be yours. Treat it better than Quellion did."
"I will,"
Spook said.
"My men will
create a disturbance for you at the meeting. Farewell." Durn
took the next left, disappearing down another streetslot alleyway.
Ahead, the crowds
were already gathering. Spook put up the hood of his cloak, keeping
his eyes obscured as he wove his way through the crowd. He quickly
left Sazed and the others behind, pushing his way up a ramp to the
old city square—the place Quellion had chosen for his speech.
His men had erected a wooden stage, from which the Citizen could face
the crowd. The speech was already in progress. Spook stopped just a
short distance away from a guard patrol. Many of Quellion's soldiers
surrounded the stage, eyeing the crowd.
Minutes passed, and
Spook spent them listening to Quellion's voice ring, yet paying no
attention to the words. Ash fell around him, dusting the crowd. Mists
began to twist in the air.
He listened,
listened with ears no other man had. He used Allomancy's strange
ability to filter and ignore—hearing through the chatter and
whispers and shuffles and coughs, just as he could somehow see
through the obscuring mists. He heard the city. Yells in the
distance.
It was beginning.
"Too fast!"
a voice whispered, a beggar moving up to Spook's side. "Durn
sends word. Riots in the streets, ones he didn't start! Durn cannot
control them. My lord, the city is beginning to burn!"
"It was a
night not unlike this one," another voice whispered. Kelsier's
voice. "A glorious night. When I took the city of Luthadel, and
made it mine."
A disturbance began
at the back of the crowd; Durn's men were causing their distraction.
Some of Quellion's guards pulled away to quell this nearby riot. The
Citizen continued to shout his accusations. Spook heard his own name
in Quellion's words, but the context was simply noise.
Spook tilted his
head back, looking up at the sky. Ash fell toward him, as if he were
sailing through it into the air. Like a Mistborn.
His hood fell back.
Men around him whispered in surprise.
A clock rang in the
distance. Goradel's soldiers rushed the stage. Around him, Spook
could feel a glow rising. The fires of rebellion, burning in the
city. Just like the night he had overthrown the Lord Ruler. The
torches of revolution. Then the people had put Elend on the throne.
This time, it would
be Spook they elevated.
Weak no more,
he thought. Never weak again!
The last of
Quellion's soldiers rushed away from the stage, moving into combat
with Goradel's men. The crowd shied away from the battle, but nobody
ran. They had been prepared well for the night's events. Many would
be waiting, watching for the signs Spook and Durn had promised—signs
revealed just a few hours before, to minimize the risk of Quellion's
spies learning Spook's plan. A miracle in the canals, and proof that
Quellion was an Allomancer.
If the Citizen—or
even any of his guards on the stage—shot coins or used
Allomancy to leap into the air, the people would see. They would know
that they had been deceived. And that would be the end. The crowd
surged away from the cursing soldiers, and their withdrawal left
Spook standing alone. Quellion's voice finally trailed off. Some of
his soldiers were rushing up to get him off the stage.
Quellion's eyes
found Spook. Only then did they show fear.
Spook leaped. He
couldn't Steelpush himself, but his legs were fueled by the power of
flared pewter. He soared up, easily cresting the lip of the stage,
landing in a crouch. He pulled free a dueling cane, then rushed the
Citizen.
Behind him, people
began to cry out. Spook heard his name, Survivor of the Flames.
Survivor. He wouldn't just kill Quellion, but destroy him.
Undermining his rule, just as Breeze had suggested. At that moment,
the Soother and Allrianne would be manipulating the crowd, keeping
them from running away in a panic. Holding them there.
So they could watch
the show Spook was about to give.
The guards at
Quellion's side saw Spook too late. He dropped the first one easily,
crushing the man's skull inside his helmet. Quellion screamed for
more help.
Spook swung at
another man, but his target moved out of the way, supernaturally
quick. Spook pulled to the side just in time to dodge a blow, the
weapon grazing the side of his cheek. The man was an Allomancer—a
pewter burner. The large brute who carried no sword, but instead an
obsidian-edged cudgel.
Pewter isn't
spectacular enough, Spook thought. The people won't know how
to tell if a man is swinging too quickly or enduring too much. I have
to make Quellion shoot coins.
The Thug backed
away, obviously noting Spook's own increased speed. He kept his
weapon raised warily, but did not attack. He just had to stall,
letting his companion pull Quellion away. The Thug would be no easy
fight—he would be more skilled than Spook, and even stronger.
"Your family
is free," Spook lied quietly. "We saved them earlier. Help
us capture Quellion—he no longer has a hold on you."
The Thug paused,
lowering his weapon.
"Kill him!"
Kelsier snapped.
That hadn't been
Spook's plan, but he responded to the prompting. He dodged inside the
Thug's reach. The man turned in shock, and as he did, Spook delivered
a backhanded blow to the skull. Spook's dueling cane shattered. The
Thug stumbled to the ground, and Spook snatched up the man's fallen
weapon, the obsidian-lined cudgel.
Quellion was at the
edge of the stage. Spook jumped, sailing across the wooden platform.
It was all right for him to use Allomancy; he hadn't preached against
it. Only Quellion the hypocrite needed to fear using his powers.
Spook cut down the
remaining guard as he landed—the jagged shards of obsidian
ripping through flesh. The soldier fell, and Quellion spun.
"I don't fear
you!" Quellion said, voice shaking. "I'm protected!"
"Kill him,"
Kelsier ordered, appearing visibly on the stage a short distance
away. Usually, the Survivor only spoke in his mind; he hadn't
actually appeared since that day in the burning building. It meant
important things were happening.
Spook grabbed the
Citizen by the front of his shirt, yanking him forward. Spook raised
the length of wood, blood dripping from the obsidian shards onto the
side of his hand.
"No!"
Spook froze at that
voice, then glanced to the side. She was there, shoving her
way through the crowd, approaching the open space before the stage.
"Beldre?"
Spook asked. "How did you get out of the cavern?"
But, of course, she
couldn't hear him. Only Spook's supernatural hearing had allowed him
to pick her voice out of the sounds of fear and battle. He met her
eyes across the distance, and saw her whispered words more than he
heard them.
Please. You
promised.
"Kill him!"
Quellion chose that
moment to try and pull away. Spook turned, yanking back again—harder
this time, nearly ripping Quellion's shirt free as he threw the man
down to the wooden platform. Quellion cried out in pain, and Spook
raised his brutal weapon with both hands.
Something sparked
in the firelight. Spook barely felt the impact, though it shook him.
He stumbled, looking down, seeing blood on his side. Something had
pierced the flesh of his left arm and shoulder. Not an arrow, though
it had moved like one. His arm drooped, and though he couldn't feel
the pain, it seemed that his muscles weren't working properly.
Something hit
me. A . . . coin.
He turned. Beldre
stood at the front of the crowd, crying, her hand raised toward him.
She was there
that day I was captured, Spook thought numbly, at her
brother's side. He always keeps her near. To protect her, we thought.
Or the other
way around?
Spook stood up
straighter, Quellion whimpering in front of him. Spook's arm dripped
a trail of blood from where Beldre's coin had hit, but he ignored it,
staring at her.
"You were
always the Allomancer," he whispered. "Not your brother."
And then, the crowd
began to scream—likely prompted by Breeze. "The Citizen's
sister is an Allomancer!"
"Hypocrite!"
"Liar!"
"He killed my
uncle, yet left his own sister alive!"
Beldre cried out as
the people, carefully prepared and planted, saw the proof that Spook
had promised them. It didn't have the target he had intended, but the
machine he had set in motion could not be halted now. The people
gathered around Beldre, yelling in anger, shoving her among
themselves.
Spook stepped
toward her, raising his wounded arm. Then a shadow fell on him.
"She was
always planning to betray you, Spook," Kelsier said.
Spook turned,
looking at the Survivor. He stood tall and proud, like the day when
he'd faced the Lord Ruler.
"You kept
waiting for an assassin," Kelsier said. "You didn't realize
that Quellion had already sent one. His sister. Didn't it strike you
as strange that he'd let her get away from him and enter the enemy's
own base? She was sent there to kill you. You, Sazed, and Breeze. The
problem is, she was raised a pampered rich girl. She's not used to
killing. She never was. You were never really in danger from her."
The crowd surged,
and Spook spun, worried about Beldre. However, he calmed a bit as he
realized that the people were simply pulling her toward the stage.
"Survivor!" people were chanting. "Survivor of the
Flames!"
"King!"
They cast Beldre
before him, pushing her up onto the platform. Her scarlet clothing
was ripped, her figure battered, her auburn hair a mess. To the side,
Quellion groaned. Spook appeared to have broken his arm without
realizing it.
Spook moved to help
Beldre. She was bleeding from several small cuts, but she was alive.
And she was crying.
"She was his
bodyguard," Kelsier said, stepping over to Beldre. "That's
why she was always with him. Quellion isn't an Allomancer. He never
was."
Spook knelt beside
the girl, cringing at her bruised form.
"Now, you must
kill her," Kelsier said.
Spook looked up,
blood seeping from the cut on the side of his face, where the Thug
had grazed him. Blood dripped from his chin. "What?"
"You want
power, Spook?" Kelsier said, stepping forward. "You want to
be a better Allomancer? Well, power must come from somewhere. It is
never free. This woman is a Coinshot. Kill her, and you can have her
ability. I will give it to you."
Spook looked down
at the weeping woman. He felt surreal, as if he were not quite there.
His breathing was labored, each breath coming as a gasp, his body
shaking despite his pewter. People chanted his name. Quellion was
mumbling something. Beldre continued to cry.
Spook reached up
with his bloodied hand, ripping off his blindfold, spectacles
tumbling free. He stumbled to his feet, looking out over the city.
And saw it burning.
The sounds of
rioting echoed through the streets. Flames burned in a dozen
different spots, lighting the mists, casting a hellish haze over the
city. Not the fires of rebellion at all. The fires of destruction.
"This is wrong
. . ." Spook whispered.
"You will take
the city, Spook," Kelsier said. "You will have what you
always wanted! You'll be like Elend, and like Vin. Better than
either! You'll have Elend's titles and Vin's power! You'll be like a
god!"
Spook turned away
from the burning city as something caught his attention. Quellion was
reaching out with his good arm, reaching toward . . .
Toward Kelsier.
"Please,"
Quellion whispered. It seemed as if he could see the
Survivor, though nobody else around them could. "My lord
Kelsier, why have you forsaken me?"
"I gave you
pewter, Spook," Kelsier said angrily, not looking at Quellion.
"Will you deny me now? You must pull free one of the steel
spikes that support this stage. Then, you must take the girl, and
press her to your chest. Kill her with the spike, and drive it into
your own body. That is the only way!"
Kill her with
the spike . . . Spook thought, feeling numb. This all began
that day when I nearly died. I was fighting a Thug in the market; I
used him as a shield. But . . . the other soldier struck anyway,
stabbing through his friend and into me.
Spook stumbled away
from Beldre, kneeling beside Quellion. The man cried out as Spook
forced him down against the wooden planks.
"That's
right," Kelsier said. "Kill him first."
But Spook wasn't
listening. He ripped Quellion's shirt, looking at the shoulder and
chest. There was nothing odd about either. The Citizen's upper arm,
however, had a length of metal piercing it. It appeared to be bronze.
Hand shaking, Spook pulled the metal free. Quellion screamed.
But so did Kelsier.
Spook turned,
bloodied bronze spike in his hand. Kelsier was enraged, hands like
claws, stepping forward.
"What are
you?" Spook asked.
The thing screamed,
but Spook ignored it, looking down at his own chest. He ripped open
his shirt, exposing the mostly healed wound in his shoulder. A
glimmer of metal still shone there, the tip of the sword. The sword
that had passed through an Allomancer—killing the man—and
then entered Spook's own body. Kelsier had told him to leave the
broken shard there. As a symbol of what Spook had gone through.
The point of the
shard protruded from Spook's skin. How had he forgotten about it? How
had he ignored such a relatively large piece of metal inside of his
body? Spook reached for it.
"No!"
Kelsier said. "Spook, do you want to go back to being normal? Do
you want to be useless again? You'll lose your pewter, and go back to
being weak, like you were when you let your uncle die!"
Spook wavered.
No, Spook
thought. Something is wrong. I was supposed to expose Quellion,
get him to use his Allomancy, but I just attacked instead. I wanted
to kill. I forgot about plans and preparation. I brought destruction
to this city.
This is not
right!
He pulled the glass
dagger from his boot. Kelsier screamed terribly in his ears, but
Spook reached up anyway, slicing the flesh of his chest. He reached
in with pewter-enhanced fingers and grabbed the steel shard that was
embedded inside.
Then, he ripped the
bit of metal free, casting it across the stage, crying out at the
shock of pain. Kelsier vanished immediately. And so did Spook's
ability to burn pewter.
It hit him all at
once—the fatigue of pushing himself so hard during his time in
Urteau. The wounds he'd been ignoring. The sudden explosion of light,
sound, smell, and sensation that pewter had let him resist. It
overcame him like a physical force, crushing him down. He collapsed
to the platform.
He groaned, unable
to think anymore. He could simply let the blackness take him. . . .
Her city is
burning.
Blackness . . .
Thousands will
die in the flames.
The mists tickled
his cheeks. In the cacophony, Spook had let his tin dim, relieving
him of sensation, leaving him feeling blissfully numb. It was better
that way.
You want to be
like Kelsier? Really like Kelsier? Then fight when you are beaten!
"Lord Spook!"
The voice was faint.
Survive!
With a scream of
pain, Spook flared tin. As the metal always did, it brought a wave of
sensations—thousands of them, shocking him at once. Pain.
Feeling. Hearing. Sounds, smells, lights.
And lucidity.
Spook forced
himself to his knees, coughing. Blood still streamed down his arm. He
looked up. Sazed was running toward the platform.
"Lord Spook!"
Sazed said, puffing as he arrived. "Lord Breeze is trying to
damp down riots, but we pushed this city too far, I think! The people
will destroy it in their rage."
"The flames,"
Spook croaked. "We have to put out the fires. The city is too
dry; it has too much wood. It will burn, with everyone in it."
Sazed looked grave.
"There is no way. We must get out! This riot will destroy us."
Spook glanced to
the side. Beldre was kneeling beside her brother. She'd bound his
wound, and then made a makeshift sling for his arm. Quellion glanced
at Spook, looking dazed. As if he'd just awoken from a dream.
Spook stumbled to
his feet. "We won't abandon the city, Sazed."
"But—"
"No!"
Spook said. "I ran from Luthadel and left Clubs to die. I will
not run again! We can stop the flames. We just need water."
Sazed paused.
"Water,"
Beldre said, standing.
"The canals
will fill soon," Spook said. "We can organize fire
brigades—use the flood to stop the flames."
Beldre glanced
down. "There will be no flood, Spook. The guards you left . . .
I attacked them with coins."
Spook felt a chill.
"Dead?"
She shook her head,
hair disheveled, her face scratched. "I don't know," she
said quietly. "I didn't look."
"The waters
have not come yet," Sazed said. "They . . . should have
been released by now."
"Then we will
bring them!" Spook snapped. He spun at Quellion, then stumbled,
feeling dizzy. "You!" he said, pointing at the Citizen.
"You would be king of this city? Well, lead this people, then.
Get control of them and prepare them to put out the fires."
"I can't,"
Quellion said. "They'll kill me for what I've done."
Spook wobbled,
light-headed. He steadied himself against a beam, holding his head.
Beldre took a step toward him.
Spook looked up,
meeting Quellion's eyes. The fires of the city were so bright that
his flared tin made it difficult to see. Yet, he dared not release
the metal—only the power of noise, heat, and pain was keeping
him conscious.
"You will
go to them," Spook said. "I don't give a damn if they rip
you apart, Quellion. You're going to try to save this city. If you
don't, I'll kill you myself. Do you understand?"
The Citizen froze,
then nodded.
"Sazed,"
Spook said, "take him to Breeze and Allrianne. I'm going to the
cache. I'll bring the floodwaters to the canals, one way or another.
Have Breeze and the others form fire brigades to douse the flames as
soon as there is water."
Sazed nodded. "It
is a good plan. But Goradel will lead the Citizen. I am coming with
you."
Spook nodded
wearily. Then, as Sazed moved off to get the guard captain—who
had apparently established a defensive perimeter around the
square—Spook climbed from the stage and forced himself to begin
moving toward the cache.
Soon, he noticed
someone catch up to him. Then, after a few moments, that person
passed him and ran on. Part of his mind knew it was a good thing that
Sazed had decided to move on—the Terrisman had created the
mechanism that would flood the city. He would throw the lever. Spook
wasn't needed.
Keep moving.
He did, walking on,
as if each step were in atonement for what he had done to the city.
After a short time, he realized that someone was at his side, tying a
bandage on his arm.
He blinked.
"Beldre?"
"I betrayed
you," she said, looking down. "But, I didn't have a choice.
I couldn't let you kill him. I . . ."
"You did the
right thing," Spook said. "Something . . . something was
interfering, Beldre. It had your brother. It almost had me. I don't
know. We have to keep walking, though. The lair is close. Just up the
ramp."
She supported him
as they walked. Spook smelled the smoke before he got there. He saw
the light, and felt the heat. He and Beldre climbed up to the top of
the ramp, practically crawling, for she was nearly as battered as he
was. However, Spook knew what he would find.
The Ministry
building, like so much of the town, was burning. Sazed stood before
it, hand raised before his eyes. To Spook's overenhanced senses, the
brilliance of the flames was so great that he had to look away. The
heat made him feel as if he were standing just inches from the sun.
Sazed tried to get
closer to the building, but was forced back. He turned toward Spook,
shielding his face. "It's too hot!" he said. "We need
to find some water, or perhaps some sand. Put out the fire before we
can get below."
"Too late . .
." Spook whispered. "It will take too long."
Beldre turned,
looking over her city. To Spook's eyes, smoke seemed to twist and
rise everywhere in the bright sky, reaching up, as if to meet the
falling ash.
He set his jaw,
then stumbled forward, toward the fire.
"Spook!"
she cried out. But, she needn't have worried. The flames were too
hot. The pain was so strong that he had to pull back before he'd
crossed even half the distance. He stumbled away, joining Beldre and
Sazed, gasping quietly, blinking tears. His heightened senses made it
even more difficult for him to approach the flames.
"There is
nothing we can do here," Sazed said. "We must gather crews
and come back."
"I've failed,"
Spook whispered.
"No more than
any of us," Sazed said. "This is my fault. The emperor put
me in command."
"We were
supposed to bring security to the city," Spook said. "Not
destruction. I should be able to stop those fires. But, it hurts too
much."
Sazed shook his
head. "Ah, Lord Spook. You are no god, to command fire at your
whim. You are a man, like the rest of us. We're all just . . . men."
Spook allowed them
to pull him away. Sazed was right, of course. He was just a man. Just
Spook. Kelsier had chosen his crew with care. He'd left a note for
them, when he died. It had listed the others—Vin, Breeze,
Dockson, Clubs, and Ham. He'd spoken of them, of why he'd picked
them.
But not Spook. The
only one who didn't fit in.
I named you,
Spook. You were my friend.
Isn't that
enough?
Spook froze,
forcing the others to stop. Sazed and Beldre looked at him. Spook
stared into the night. A night that was far too bright. The fires
burned. The smoke was pungent.
"No,"
Spook whispered, feeling fully lucid for the first time since the
evening's violence had started. He pulled himself free of Sazed's
grip and ran back toward the burning building.
"Spook!"
Two voices yelled in the night.
Spook approached
the flames. His breathing grew forced, and his skin grew hot. The
fire was bright—consuming. He dashed right for it. Then, at the
moment when the pain became too great, he extinguished his tin.
And became numb.
It happened just as
it had before, when he had been trapped in the building without any
metals. Flaring tin for so long had expanded his senses, but now that
he wasn't burning it at all, those same senses became dull. His
entire body grew deadened, lacking feeling or sensation.
He burst through
the doorway into the building, flames raining around him.
His body burned.
But, he couldn't feel the flames, and the pain could not drive him
back. The fire was bright enough that even his weakened eyes could
still see. He dashed forward, ignoring fire, heat, and smoke.
Survivor of the
Flames.
He knew the fires
were killing him. Yet, he forced himself onward, continuing to move
long after the pain should have rendered him unconscious. He reached
the room at the back, skidding and sliding down the broken ladder.
The cavern was
dark. He stumbled through it, pushing his way past shelves and
furniture, making his way along the wall, moving with a desperation
that warned him that his time was short. His body wasn't working
right anymore—he had pushed it too far, and he no longer had
pewter.
He was glad for the
darkness. As he finally stumbled against Sazed's machine, he knew
that he would have been horrified to see what the flames had done to
his arms.
Groaning quietly,
he felt for and found the lever—or, through numb hands, what he
hoped was the lever. His fingers no longer worked. So, he simply
threw his weight against it, moving the gears as required.
Then he slid down
to the ground, feeling only cold and dark.






PART FIVE
TRUST
I do not know
what went on in the minds of the koloss—what memories they
retained, what human emotions they truly still knew. I do know that
our discovery of the one creature, who named himself Human, was
tremendously fortunate. Without his struggle to become human again,
we might never have understood the link between the koloss,
Hemalurgy, and the Inquisitors.
Of course,
there was another part for him to play. Granted, not large, but still
important, all things considered.





59
URTEAU HAD
SEEN BETTER DAYS.
Vin certainly
did her work here well, TenSoon thought as he padded through the
city, shocked at the destruction. About two years ago—before
he'd been sent to spy on Vin—he had been Straff Venture's
kandra, and had often visited Urteau. While it had never matched
Luthadel's noble majesty or sprawling poverty, it had been a fine
city, worthy of being the seat of a Great House.
Now, a good third
of the city was a burned ruin. Those buildings that hadn't burned
down were either abandoned or overcrowded—an odd mixture, in
TenSoon's opinion. Apparently, noble homes were avoided, while skaa
buildings were overpacked.
More remarkable,
however, were the canals. They had been refilled somehow. TenSoon sat
on his haunches, watching the occasional makeshift boat push its way
through a canal, displacing the patina of ash that covered the water.
Here and there, debris and refuse clogged the waterways, but they
were passable in most places.
He rose, shaking
his canine head, continuing on his way. He'd stowed the bag with
Kelsier's bones outside, not wanting to look odd carrying a pack on
his back.
What had been the
purpose of burning the city, then restoring its canals? He would
likely have to wait to find the answer. He'd seen no army camped
outside; if Vin had been here, she'd already moved on to another
location. His goal now was to find what passed for leadership in the
remains of the city, then continue on his way, hunting down the Hero
of Ages.
As he walked, he
heard the people talking—speaking of how they'd managed to
survive the fires that had claimed much of the city. They actually
seemed cheerful. There was despair, too, but there seemed an
inordinate amount of happiness. This was not a city whose people had
been conquered.
They feel they
defeated the fire, TenSoon thought, making his way along a more
crowded street. They don't see losing a third of the city as a
disaster—they see saving two-thirds of it as a miracle.
He followed the
flow of traffic toward the center of town, where he finally found the
soldiers he'd expected. They were definitely Elend's, bearing the
spear and the scroll on the arms of their uniforms. However, they
defended an unlikely location: a Ministry building.
TenSoon sat back on
his haunches, cocking his head. The building was obviously a center
of operations. People bustled about under the eyes of the watchful
soldiers, moving in and out. If he wanted answers, he'd need to get
inside. He briefly considered going to fetch Kelsier's bones from
outside the city. However, he discarded that thought. He wasn't
certain if he wanted to deal with the ramifications of making the
Survivor appear again. There was another way to get in—equally
shocking, perhaps, but far less theologically disturbing.
He padded over to
the front of the building and walked up the steps, drawing a few
startled looks. As he approached the front doors, one of the guards
shouted at him, waving the butt of a spear his direction.
"Here now!"
the man said. "This is no place for dogs. Whose hound is this?"
TenSoon sat back on
his haunches. "I belong to no man," he said.
The guard jumped
back in shock, and TenSoon got a twisted sense of pleasure. He
immediately chided himself. The world was ending, and he went about
startling random soldiers. Still, it was an advantage of
wearing a dog's body that he'd never considered. . . .
"Wha . . ."
the soldier said, looking around to see if he were the victim of some
joke.
"I said,"
TenSoon repeated, "that I belong to no man. I am my own master."
It was a strange
concept—the weight of which, undoubtedly, the guard could never
grasp. TenSoon, a kandra, was outside of the Homeland without a
Contract. As far as he knew, he was the first of his people to do
such a thing in seven hundred years. It felt oddly . . . satisfying.
Several people were
staring at him now. Other guards had approached, looking to their
comrade for an explanation.
TenSoon gambled.
"I've come from Emperor Venture," he said. "I bear a
message for your leaders here."
To TenSoon's
satisfaction, several of the other guards jumped. The first one,
however—now an old hand when it came to talking dogs—raised
a hesitant finger, pointing into the building. "In there."
"Thank you,"
TenSoon said, rising and walking through a now-quiet crowd as he made
his way into the Ministry offices. He heard comments about "trick"
and "well-trained" behind him, and noticed several guards
running past him, faces urgent. He wound his way through groups and
lines of people, all ignorant of the odd occurrence at the entrance
to the building. At the end of the lines, TenSoon found . . .
Breeze. The Soother
sat in a throne-like chair, holding a cup of wine, looking very
pleased with himself as he made proclamations and settled disputes.
He looked much as he had when TenSoon had served as Vin's servant.
One of the guards stood whispering to Breeze. Both eyed TenSoon as he
padded up to the front of the line. The guard paled slightly, but
Breeze just leaned forward, smiling.
"So," he
said, tapping his cane lightly against the marble floor. "Were
you always a kandra, or did you eat the bones of Vin's hound
recently?"
TenSoon sat. "I
was always a kandra."
Breeze nodded. "I
knew there was something odd about you—far too well behaved for
a wolfhound." He smiled, sipping his wine. "Lord Renoux, I
presume? It's been a while."
"I'm not him,
actually," TenSoon said. "I'm a different kandra. It's . .
. complicated."
That gave Breeze
pause. He eyed TenSoon, and TenSoon felt just a moment of panic.
Breeze was a Soother—and, like all Soothers, he held the power
to take control of TenSoon's body. The Secret.
No, TenSoon
told himself forcefully. Allomancers are weaker now than they
once were. Only with duralumin could they take control of a kandra,
and Breeze is only a Misting—he can't burn duralumin.
"Drinking on
the job, Breeze?" TenSoon asked, raising a canine eyebrow.
"Of course,"
Breeze said, raising the cup. "What good is being in charge if
you can't set your own working conditions?"
TenSoon snorted. He
hadn't ever really liked Breeze—though perhaps that came from
his bias against Soothers. Or, perhaps, his bias against all humans.
Regardless, he wasn't inclined toward small talk. "Where is
Vin?" he asked.
Breeze frowned. "I
thought you brought a message from her?"
"I lied to the
guards," TenSoon said. "I've actually come searching for
her. I bring news she needs to hear—news regarding the mists
and ash."
"Well, then,
my dear man . . . um . . . I suppose I mean my dear doggie.
Anyway, let us retire; you can talk to Sazed. He's far more useful
than I am regarding these sorts of things."
". . . and,
with Spook barely having survived the ordeal," said the
Terrisman, "I thought it best to let Lord Breeze take command.
We set up shop in a different Ministry building—it seemed
equipped to be a bureaucratic center—and had Breeze start
listening to petitions. He is better at dealing with people than I
am, I think, and seems to enjoy taking care of the day-to-day
concerns of the citizenry."
The Terrisman sat
in his chair, a portfolio open on the desk before him, a pile of
notes beside it. Sazed looked different to TenSoon for some reason
that he couldn't pin down. The Keeper wore the same robes, and had
the same Feruchemical bracers on his arms. There was something
missing, however.
That, however, was
the least of TenSoon's problems.
"Fadrex
City?" TenSoon asked, sitting on his own chair. They were
in one of the smaller rooms at the Ministry building—one that
had once been an obligator's sleeping quarters. Now, it simply held a
desk and chairs, the walls and floor as austere as one might expect
for Ministry furnishings.
Sazed nodded. "She
and the emperor hoped to find another of these storage caverns
there."
TenSoon slumped.
Fadrex was halfway across the empire. Even with the Blessing of
Potency, it would take weeks for him to get there. He had a very,
very long run ahead of him.
"Might I ask
what business you have with Lady Vin, kandra?" Sazed asked.
TenSoon paused. It
felt very odd, in a way, to speak so openly with Breeze, and now
Sazed. These were men that TenSoon had watched for months while he
acted like a dog. They'd never known him, yet he felt as if he knew
them.
He knew, for
instance, that Sazed was dangerous. The Terrisman was a Keeper—a
group that TenSoon and his brethren had been trained to avoid.
Keepers were always prying for rumors, legends, and tales. The kandra
had many secrets; if the Keepers were ever to discover the riches of
kandra culture, it could be disastrous. They'd want to study, ask
questions, and record what they found.
TenSoon opened his
mouth to say "Nothing." However, he stopped. Didn't he want
someone to help with kandra culture? Someone who focused on
religions, and who—perhaps—knew much of theology? Someone
who knew about the legends of the Hero of Ages? Of all the members of
the crew other than Vin, TenSoon had held Sazed in the highest
regard.
"It has to do
with the Hero of Ages," TenSoon said carefully. "And the
advent of the world's end."
"Ah,"
Sazed said, rising. "Very well then. I shall give you whatever
provisions you need. Will you be starting out immediately? Or, will
you be staying here to rest for a time?"
What? TenSoon
thought. Sazed hadn't even twitched at the mention of religious
matters. It didn't seem like him at all.
Yet, Sazed
continued speaking, as if TenSoon hadn't just hinted at one of the
greatest religious secrets of their age.
I'll never
understand humans, he thought, shaking his head.

The prison
Preservation created for Ruin was not created out of Preservation's
power, though it was of Preservation. Rather, Preservation
sacrificed his consciousness—one could say his mind—to
fabricate that prison. He left a shadow of himself, but Ruin, once
escaped, began to suffocate and isolate this small remnant vestige of
his rival. I wonder if Ruin ever thought it strange that Preservation
had cut himself off from his own power, relinquishing it and leaving
it in the world, to be gathered and used by men.
In
Preservation's gambit, I see nobility, cleverness, and desperation.
He knew that he could not defeat Ruin. He had given too much of
himself and, beyond that, he was the embodiment of stasis and
stability. He could not destroy, not even to protect. It was against
his nature. Hence the prison.
Mankind,
however, had been created by both Ruin and Preservation—with a
hint of Preservation's own soul to give them sentience and honor. In
order for the world to survive, Preservation knew he had to depend
upon his creations. To give them his trust.
I wonder what
he thought when those creations repeatedly failed him.





60
THE BEST
WAY TO FOOL SOMEONE, in Vin's estimation, was to give them
what they wanted. Or, at the very least, what they expected. As long
as they assumed that they were one step ahead, they wouldn't look
back to see if there were any steps that they'd completely missed.
Yomen had designed
her prison well. Any metal used in the construction of her cot or
facilities was Allomantically useless. Silver, while expensive,
seemed the metal of choice—and there was very little even of
that. Just a few screws in the cot that Vin managed to work free with
her fingernails.
Her meals—a
greasy, flavorless gruel—were served in wooden bowls, with
wooden spoons. The guards were hazekillers: men who carried staves
and wore no metal on their bodies, and who had been trained to fight
Allomancers. Her room was a simple stone construction with a solid
wooden door, its hinges and bolts made of silver.
She knew from her
guards' behavior that they expected something from her. Yomen had
prepared them well, and so when they slid her food through the slit,
she could see the tension in their bodies and the speed of their
retreat. It was like they were feeding a viper.
So, the next time
they came to take her to Yomen, she attacked.
She moved as soon
as the door opened, wielding a wooden leg she'd pulled off her cot.
She dropped the first guard with a club to the arm, then a second hit
on the back of his head. Her blows felt weak without pewter, but it
was the best she could manage. She scrambled past the second guard in
line, then slammed her shoulder into the stomach of the third. She
didn't weigh much, but it was enough to get him to drop his
staff—which she immediately grabbed.
Ham had spent a
long time training her with the staff, and he'd often made her fight
without Allomancy. Even with all of their preparation, the guards
were obviously surprised to see a metalless Allomancer make so much
trouble, and she dropped two more of them as she scurried to escape.
Unfortunately,
Yomen was not a fool. He had sent so many guards to bring her that
even dropping four of them made little difference. There had to be at
least twenty men in the hallway outside her cell, clogging her exit,
if nothing else.
Her goal was to
give them what they expected, not get herself killed. So, as soon as
she confirmed that her "escape attempt" really was doomed,
she let one of the soldiers hit her on the shoulder and she dropped
her staff with a grunt. Disarmed, she raised her hands and backed
away. The soldiers, of course, swept her feet out from beneath her
and piled on top of her, holding her down while one manacled her
arms.
Vin suffered the
treatment, shoulder pulsing with pain. How long would she have to go
without metal before she'd stop instinctively trying to burn pewter?
She hoped she'd never actually find out.
Eventually, the
soldiers pulled her to her feet and pushed her down the hallway. The
three she'd knocked down—not to mention the one that she'd
disarmed—grumbled a bit, rubbing their wounds. All twenty men
regarded her even more warily, if that was possible.
She didn't give
them any trouble until they got her into Yomen's audience chamber.
When they moved to chain her manacles to the bench, she squirmed a
bit, earning herself a knee in the stomach. She gasped, then slumped
to the floor beside the bench. There, groaning, she rubbed her hands
and wrists with the gruel grease that she'd soaked into her
undershirt. It was smelly and grimy, but it was very slick—and
the guards, distracted by her escape attempt, had completely
forgotten to search her.
"Surely you
didn't think to escape without any metals to burn," Yomen asked.
Vin lifted her
head. He stood with his back to her again, though this time he was
looking out a dark window. Vin found it very odd to see the mists
curling up against the window glass. Most skaa couldn't afford glass,
and most noblemen chose the colored kind. The darkness outside of
Yomen's window seemed a waiting beast, the mists its fur brushing
against the glass as it shifted.
"I would think
that you'd be flattered," Yomen continued. "I didn't know
if you were really as dangerous as reported, but I decided to assume
that you were. You see, I—"
Vin didn't give him
any more time. There were only two ways she could escape from the
city: the first would be to find some metals, the second would be to
take Yomen captive. She planned to try both.
She yanked her
greased hands free from the manacles, which had been fastened to her
arms when they were squirming and flexed. She ignored the pain and
the blood as the manacles scraped her hands, then she leaped to her
feet, reaching into a fold in her shirt and pulling out the silver
screws that she'd taken from her cot. These, she threw at the
soldiers.
The men, of course,
yelled in surprise and threw themselves to the ground, ducking her
presumed Steelpush. Their own preparation and worry worked against
them—for Vin had no steel. The screws bounced against the wall
ineffectively, and the guards lay confused by her feint. She was
halfway to Yomen before the first one thought to scramble back to his
feet.
Yomen turned. As
always, he wore the little drop of atium at his forehead. Vin lunged
for it.
Yomen stepped
casually out of the way. Vin lunged again, this time feinting, then
trying to elbow him in the stomach. Her attack didn't land, however,
as Yomen—hands still clasped behind his back—sidestepped
her again.
She knew that look
on his face—that look of complete control, of power. Yomen
obviously had very little battle training, but he dodged her anyway.
He was burning
atium.
Vin stumbled to a
halt. No wonder he wears that bit on his forehead, she
thought. It's for emergencies. She could see in his smile
that he really had anticipated her. He'd known that she
would try something, and he'd baited her, letting her get close. But,
he'd never really been in danger.
The guards finally
caught up with her, but Yomen raised a hand, waving them back. Then
he gestured toward the bench. Quietly, Vin returned and sat down. She
had to think, and she certainly wasn't going to get anywhere with
Yomen burning atium.
As she sat, Ruin
appeared next to her—materializing as if from dark smoke,
wearing Reen's body. None of the others reacted; they obviously
couldn't see him.
"Too bad,"
Ruin said. "In a way, you almost had him. But . . . then, in a
way, you were never really close, either."
She ignored Ruin,
looking up at Yomen. "You're Mistborn."
"No," he
said, shaking his head. He didn't turn back toward his window,
however. He stood facing her, wary. He'd probably turned off his
atium—it was far too valuable to leave burning—but he'd
have it in reserve, careful to watch her for signs of another attack.
"No?" Vin
said, raising a skeptical eyebrow. "You were burning atium,
Yomen. I saw that much."
"Believe as
you wish," Yomen said. "But know this, woman: I do not lie.
I've never needed lies, and I find that is particularly true now,
when the entire world is in chaos. People need truth from those they
follow."
Vin frowned.
"Regardless,
it is time," Yomen said.
"Time?"
Vin asked.
Yomen nodded. "Yes.
I apologize for leaving you for so long in your cell. I have been . .
. distracted."
Elend, Vin
thought. What has he been doing? I feel so blind!
She glanced at
Ruin, who stood on the other side of the bench, shaking his head as
if he understood far more than he was telling her. She turned back to
Yomen. "I still don't understand," she said. "Time for
what?"
Yomen met her eyes.
"Time for me to make a decision about your execution, Lady
Venture."
Oh, she
thought. Right. Between her dealings with Ruin and her plans
to escape, she'd nearly forgotten Yomen's declaration that he
intended to let her "defend" herself before he executed
her.
Ruin walked across
the room, circling Yomen in a leisurely stroll. The obligator king
stood, still meeting Vin's eyes. If he could see Ruin, he didn't show
it. Instead, he waved to a guard, who opened a side door, leading in
several obligators in gray robes. They seated themselves on a bench
across the room from Vin.
"Tell me, Lady
Venture," Yomen said, turning back to her, "why did you
come to Fadrex City?"
Vin cocked her
head. "I thought this wasn't to be a trial. You said that you
didn't need that sort of thing."
"I would
think," Yomen replied, "that you would be pleased with any
delay in the process."
A delay meant more
time to think—more time to possibly escape. "Why did we
come?" Vin asked. "We knew you had one of the Lord Ruler's
supply caches beneath your city."
Yomen raised an
eyebrow. "How did you know about it?"
"We found
another one," Vin said. "It had directions to Fadrex."
Yomen nodded to
himself. She could tell that he believed her, but there was something
. . . else. He seemed to be making connections that she didn't
understand, and probably didn't have the information to understand.
"And the danger my kingdom posed to yours?" Yomen asked.
"That didn't have anything at all to do with your invasion of my
lands?"
"I wouldn't
say that," Vin said. "Cett had been pushing Elend to move
into this dominance for some time."
The obligators
conferred quietly at this comment, though Yomen stood aloof, arms
folded as he regarded her. Vin found the experience unnerving. It had
been years—from her days in Camon's crew—since she had
felt so much in another's power. Even when she'd faced the Lord
Ruler, she'd felt differently. Yomen seemed to see her as a tool.
But a tool to do
what? And, how could she manipulate his needs so that he kept her
alive long enough for her to escape?
Make yourself
indispensable, Reen had always taught. Then a crewleader
can't get rid of you without losing power himself. Even now, the
voice of her brother still seemed to whisper the words in her mind.
Were they memories, interpretations of his wisdom, or effects of
Ruin's influence? Regardless, it seemed like good advice at the
moment.
"So, you came
with the express purpose of invasion?" Yomen asked.
"Elend
intended to try diplomacy first," Vin said carefully. "However,
we both knew that it's a bit hard to play the diplomat when you camp
an army outside of someone's city."
"You admit to
being conquerors, then," Yomen said. "You are more
honest than your husband."
"Elend is more
sincere than either of us, Yomen," Vin snapped. "Just
because he interprets things differently from you or me does not mean
he's being dishonest when he expresses his view."
Yomen raised an
eyebrow, perhaps at the quickness of her response. "A valid
point."
Vin sat back on the
bench, wrapping her cut hands with a bit of clean cloth from her
shirt. Yomen stood beside the windows of the large, stark room. It
felt very odd to be speaking to him. On one hand, she and he seemed
very different. He was a bureaucrat obligator whose lack of muscle or
warrior's grace proved that he'd spent his life concerned with forms
and records. She was a child of the streets and an adult practiced in
war and assassination.
Yet, his
mannerisms, his way of speaking, seemed to resemble her own. Is
this what I might have been more like, she wondered, had I
not been born a skaa? A blunt bureaucrat rather than a terse warrior?
As Yomen
contemplated her, Ruin walked in a slow circle around the obligator
king. "This one is a disappointment," Ruin said quietly.
Vin glanced at Ruin
just briefly. He shook his head. "Such destruction this one
could have caused, had he struck out, rather than staying huddled in
his little city, praying to his dead god. Men would have followed
him. I could never get through to him on the long term,
unfortunately. Not every ploy can be successful, particularly when
the will of fools like him must be accounted for."
"So,"
Yomen said, drawing her attention back to him, "you came to take
my city because you heard of my stockpile, and because you feared a
return of the Lord Ruler's power."
"I didn't say
that," Vin said, frowning.
"You said that
you feared me."
"As a foreign
power," Vin said, "with a proven ability to undermine a
government and take it over."
"I didn't take
over," Yomen said. "I returned this city, and the
dominance, to its rightful rule. But that is beside the point. I want
you to tell me of this religion your people preach."
"The Church of
the Survivor?"
"Yes,"
Yomen said. "You are one of its heads, correct?"
"No," Vin
said. "They revere me. But I've never felt that I properly fit
as part of the religion. Mostly, it's focused around Kelsier."
"The Survivor
of Hathsin," Yomen said. "He died. How is it that people
worship him?"
Vin shrugged. "It
used to be common to worship gods that one couldn't see."
"Perhaps,"
Yomen said. "I have . . . read of such things, though I find
them difficult to understand. Faith in an unseen god—what sense
does that make? Why reject the god that they lived with for so
long—the one that they could see, and feel—in favor of
one that died? One that the Lord Ruler himself struck down?"
"You do it,"
Vin said. "You're still worshipping the Lord Ruler."
"He's not
gone," Yomen said.
Vin paused.
"No,"
Yomen said, apparently noting her confusion. "I haven't seen or
heard of him since his disappearance. However, neither do I put any
credence in reports of his death."
"He was rather
dead," Vin said. "Trust me."
"I don't trust
you, I'm afraid," Yomen said. "Tell me of that evening.
Tell me precisely what happened."
So Vin did. She
told him of her imprisonment, and of her escape with Sazed. She told
him of her decision to fight the Lord Ruler, and of her reliance on
the Eleventh Metal. She left out her strange ability to draw upon the
power of the mists, but she explained pretty much everything
else—including Sazed's theory that the Lord Ruler had been
immortal through the clever manipulation of his Feruchemy and
Allomancy in combination.
And Yomen actually
listened. Her respect for the man increased as she spoke, and as he
didn't interrupt her. He wanted to hear her story, even if he didn't
believe it. He was a man who accepted information for what it
was—another tool to be used, yet to be trusted no more than any
other tool.
"And so,"
Vin finished, "he is dead. I stabbed him through the heart
myself. Your faith in him is admirable, but it can't change what
happened."
Yomen stood
silently. The older obligators—who still sat on their
benches—had grown white in the face. She knew that her
testimony might have damned her, but for some reason she felt that
honesty—plain, blunt honesty—would serve her better than
guile. That's how she usually felt.
An odd
conviction for one who grew up in thieving crews, she thought.
Ruin had apparently grown bored during her account, and had walked
over to look out the window.
"What I need
to find out," Yomen finally said, "is why the Lord Ruler
thought it necessary for you to think that you had killed
him."
"Didn't you
listen to what just I said?" Vin demanded.
"I did,"
Yomen said calmly. "And do not forget that you are a prisoner
here—one who is very close to death."
Vin forced herself
to be quiet.
"You find my
words ridiculous?" Yomen said. "More ridiculous than your
own? Think of how I see you, claiming to have slain a man I know
to be God. Is it not plausible that he wanted this to happen? That
he's out there, still, watching us, waiting . . ."
That's what
this is all about, she realized. Why he captured me, why
he's so eager to speak with me. He's convinced that the Lord Ruler is
still alive. He just wants to figure out where I fit into all of
this. He wants me to give him the proof that he's so desperately
wishing for.
"Why don't you
think you should be part of the skaa religion, Vin?" Ruin
whispered.
She turned, trying
not to look directly at him, lest Yomen see her staring into empty
space.
"Why?"
Ruin asked. "Why don't you want them worshipping you? All of
those happy skaa? Looking toward you for hope?"
"The Lord
Ruler must be behind all of this," Yomen mused out
loud. "That means that he wanted the world to see you as his
killer. He wanted the skaa to worship you."
"Why?"
Ruin repeated. "Why be so uncomfortable? Is it because you know
you can't offer them hope? What is it they call him, the one
you are supposed to have replaced? The Survivor? A word of
Preservation, I think. . . ."
"Perhaps he
intends to return dramatically," Yomen said. "To depose you
and topple you, to prove that faith in him is the only true faith."
Why don't you
fit? Ruin whispered in her head.
"Why else
would he want them to worship you?" Yomen asked.
"They're
wrong!" Vin snapped, raising hands to her head, trying to
stop the thoughts. Trying to stop the guilt.
Yomen paused.
"They're wrong
about me," Vin said. "They don't worship me, they worship
what they think I should be. But I'm not the Heir of the Survivor. I
didn't do what Kelsier did. He freed them."
You conquered
them, Ruin whispered.
"Yes,"
Vin said, looking up. "You're looking in the wrong direction,
Yomen. The Lord Ruler won't return."
"I told you
that—"
"No," Vin
said, standing. "No, he's not coming back. He doesn't need to. I
took his place."
Elend had worried
that he was becoming another Lord Ruler, but his concern had always
seemed flawed to Vin. He hadn't been the one to conquer and reforge
an empire, she had. She'd been the one who made the other kings
submit.
She'd done exactly
as the Lord Ruler had. A Hero had risen up, and the Lord Ruler had
killed him, then taken the power of the Well of Ascension. Vin had
killed the Lord Ruler, then taken that same power. She'd given up the
power, true, but she'd filled the same role.
It all came to a
head. The reason why the skaa worshipping her, calling her their
savior, felt so wrong. Suddenly, her real role in it all seemed to
snap into place.
"I'm not the
Survivor's Heir, Yomen," she said sickly. "I'm the Lord
Ruler's."
He shook his head
dismissively.
"When you
first captured me," she said, "I wondered why you kept me
alive. An enemy Mistborn? Why not just kill me and be done with it?
You claimed that you wanted to give me a trial, but I saw through
that. I knew you had another motive. And now I know what it is."
She looked him in the eyes. "You said earlier that you planned
to execute me for the Lord Ruler's murder, but you just admitted that
you think he's still alive. You say that he'll return to topple me
from my place, so you can't kill me, lest you interfere with your
god's plans."
Yomen turned away
from her.
"You can't
kill me," she said. "Not until you're certain of my place
in your theology. That's why you kept me alive, and that's why you
risk bringing me in here to talk. You need information only I can
give—you have to get testimony from me in a trial of sorts
because you want to know what happened that night. So you can try to
convince yourself that your god still lives."
Yomen didn't
respond.
"Admit it. I'm
in no danger here." She stepped forward.
And Yomen moved.
His steps suddenly became more fluid—he didn't have the grace
of pewter or the knowledge of a warrior, but he moved just right.
She dodged instinctively, but his atium let him anticipate her, and
before she could so much as think, he'd thrown her to the floor,
holding her pinned with a knee against her back.
"I may not
kill you yet," he said calmly, "but that hardly means that
you're in 'no danger,' Lady Venture."
Vin grunted.
"I want
something from you," he said. "Something more than what
we've discussed. I want you to tell your husband to send his army
away."
"Why would I
do that?" Vin said, face pressed against the cold stone of the
floor.
"Because,"
Yomen said, "you claim to want my storage cache, yet you claim
to be good people. You now know that I will use the food in it
wisely, to feed my people. If your Elend really is as altruistic as
you claim, he certainly won't be so selfish as to throw away lives to
war, just so you can steal away our food and use it to feed your
own."
"We can grow
crops," Vin said. "We get enough light in the Central
Dominance, while you don't. The seed stock you have will be useless
to you!"
"Then trade me
for it."
"You won't
talk to us!"
Yomen stepped back,
releasing the pressure on her back. She rubbed her neck, sitting up,
feeling frustrated. "It's about more than the food in that
cache, Yomen," she said. "We control the other four of
them. The Lord Ruler, he left clues in them. There is something to
the whole group that can save us."
Yomen snorted. "You
were down there all that time, and you didn't read the plaque that
the Lord Ruler left?"
"Of course I
did."
"Then you know
that there is nothing more in those caches," Yomen
said. "They're all part of his plan, true. And for some reason
that plan requires that men think he is dead. Regardless, you know
now what he said. So, why take the city from me?"
Why take the
city from me? The real reason itched inside of Vin. Elend had
always found it an unimportant one, but to her, it held powerful
appeal. "You know full well why we have to take the city,"
Vin said. "As long as you have it, we have reason to
conquer you."
"It?"
Yomen asked.
Ruin stepped
forward, curious.
"You know what
I mean. The atium. The Lord Ruler's supply."
"That?"
Yomen asked, laughing. "This is all about the atium? Atium is
worthless!"
Vin frowned.
"Worthless? It's the single most valuable commodity in the Final
Empire!"
"Oh?"
Yomen asked. "And how many people are there around to burn it?
How many noble houses remain to play petty politics and vie for power
by showing how much atium they can leach from the Lord Ruler? The
value of atium was based in the economy of an empire, Lady Venture.
Without the trappings of a reserve system and an upper class giving
the metal implied worth, atium has no real value." Yomen shook
his head. "To a starving man, what is more important—a
loaf of bread, or an entire jar of atium he can't use, eat, or sell?"
He waved for the
guards to take her. They pulled her to her feet, and she struggled,
holding Yomen's eyes.
Yomen turned away
from her again. "Those lumps of metal do me no good,
save—perhaps—to keep you in check. No, the food was the
real resource. The Lord Ruler left me the riches I required to
establish his power again. I just need to figure out what he wants me
to do next."
The soldiers
finally succeeded in pulling her away.

I don't wonder
that we focused far too much on the mists during those days. But from
what I now know of sunlight and plant development, I realize that our
crops weren't in as much danger from misty days as we feared. We
might very well have been able to find plants to eat that did not
need as much light to survive.
True, the mists
did also cause some deaths in those who went out in them, but the
number killed was not a large enough percentage of the population to
be a threat to our survival as a species. The ash, that was our real
problem. The smoke filling the atmosphere, the black flakes covering
up everything beneath, the eruptions of the volcanic ashmounts . . .
Those were what would kill the world.





61
"ELEND!"
HAM CALLED, rushing up to him. "You're back!"
"Surprised?"
Elend asked, reading his friend's expression.
"Of course
not," Ham said, a little too quickly. "The scouts reported
your approach."
My arrival may
not surprise you, Elend thought tiredly, but the fact that
I'm still alive does. Did you think I'd run off to get myself killed,
or did you simply think that I'd wander away and abandon you?
It wasn't a line of
reasoning he wanted to pursue. So, he simply smiled, resting a hand
on Ham's shoulder and looking toward the camp. It looked strange,
bunkered down as it was, ash piled up outside of it. It looked a
little like it was dug into the ground several feet. There was so
much ash. . . .
I can't worry
about everything at once, Elend thought with determination. I
just have to trust. Trust in myself and keep going.
He had pondered the
mist spirit the rest of his trip. Had it really told him not to
attack Fadrex, or was Elend simply misinterpreting its gestures? What
had it wanted him to learn by pointing at his vial of metals?
Beside him, Ham was
regarding the mass of new koloss. To the side of the army, his other
koloss sat—still under his control. Though he had grown
increasingly adept at keeping a hold on the creatures, it was still
nice to be back close to them. It made him feel more comfortable.
Ham whistled
quietly. "Twenty-eight thousand?" he asked. "Or, at
least, that's what the scouts say."
Elend nodded.
"I hadn't
realized how large the group was," Ham said. "With that
many . . ."
Thirty-seven
thousand total, Elend thought. More than enough to storm
Fadrex.
He began to walk
down the incline, toward the camp. Though he hadn't needed much
pewter to help him through the hike, he was still tired. "Any
news of Vin?" he said hopefully, though he knew that if she'd
managed to escape, she would have already found him.
"We sent a
messenger into the city while you were gone," Ham said as they
began to walk. "Yomen said a soldier could come and confirm that
Vin was still alive, and so we complied in your name, thinking it
best if Yomen thought you were here."
"You did
well," Elend said.
"It's been a
while since then," Ham said. "We haven't heard anything of
her since."
"She's still
alive," Elend said.
Ham nodded. "I
believe so too."
Elend smiled. "It's
not just faith, Ham," he said, nodding toward the koloss that
had remained behind. "Before she was captured, I gave some of
those to her. If she'd died, then they would have gone out of
control. As long as she lives—whether or not she has metals—she
will remain bonded to them."
Ham paused. "That
. . . would have been something good to tell us earlier, El."
"I know,"
Elend said. "It's too easy to forget how many I'm controlling—I
didn't even think that not all of those are mine. Post scouts, keep
an eye on them. I'll take them back if they go wild."
Ham nodded. "Could
you contact her through them?"
Elend shook his
head. How did he explain? Controlling the koloss wasn't a subtle
thing—their minds were too dull for much beyond simple
commands. He could order them to attack, or to freeze, or to follow
and carry things. But he couldn't direct them precisely, couldn't
instruct them to speak a message or even how to accomplish a
goal. He could only say "Do this" and watch them go.
"We've had
scout reports from the Central Dominance, El," Ham said, voice
troubled.
Elend looked at
him.
"Most of our
scouts didn't return. Nobody knows what happened to Demoux and the
men you sent—we hope they reached Luthadel, but the capital is
in bad shape. The scouts who have returned bear some pretty
frustrating news. We've lost many of the cities you conquered during
this last year. The people are starving, and a lot of villages are
empty save for the dead. Those who can flee to Luthadel, leaving
trails of corpses on the road, buried in ash."
Elend closed his
eyes. But Ham wasn't done.
"There are
tales of cities swallowed by the rumbling earth," Ham said,
voice almost a whisper. "King Lekal and his city fell to lava
from one of the ashmounts. We haven't heard from Janarle in weeks;
his entire retinue seems to have vanished, and the Northern Dominance
is in chaos. The entire Southern Dominance is said to be burning. . .
. Elend, what do we do?"
Elend continued to
stride forward, walking onto an ash-free pathway and then into the
camp proper. Soldiers were gathering about, whispering, looking at
him. He didn't know how to answer Ham's question. What did he do?
What could he do?
"We'll help
them, Ham," he said. "We won't give up."
Ham nodded, looking
slightly bolstered. "Though, before you do anything else, what
you should probably do is go change your clothing. . . ."
Elend glanced down,
remembering that he was still wearing the black uniform, bloodied
from killing koloss, then stained by ash. His appearance caused quite
a stir in the men. They've only seen me in the white, pristine
outfit. Many of them have never even seen me fight—never seen
me bloodied, never seen me dirtied by ash.
He wasn't certain
what bothered him about that.
Ahead, Elend could
see a bearded figure sitting in a chair beside the pathway, as if he
were simply out there for an afternoon repast. Cett eyed him as he
passed. "More koloss?"
Elend nodded.
"We're going
to attack, then?" Cett asked.
Elend stopped.
The mist spirit
apparently didn't want him to attack. But, he couldn't be certain
what it had wanted him to know or think—he didn't even know if
he should trust it. Could he base the future of his empire on vague
impressions he got from a ghost in the mists?
He had to get into
that storage, and he couldn't afford to wait in siege—not any
longer. Plus, attacking seemed the best way to get Vin back safely.
Yomen would never return her—Elend either had to sit around and
wait, or he had to attack, hoping that in the chaos of battle, Yomen
would leave her in a dungeon somewhere. True, attacking risked an
execution, but letting Yomen use her as a bargaining chip seemed just
as dangerous for her.
I have to be
the man who makes the hard decisions, he told himself. It's
what Vin was trying to teach me at the ball—that I can be both
Elend the man, and Elend the king. I took these koloss for a purpose.
Now I need to use them.
"Inform the
soldiers," Elend said. "But don't have them form ranks. We
attack in the morning, but do so in surprise—koloss first,
breaking through their defenses. The men can form up after that, then
go in and seize control."
We'll rescue
Vin, get into that cavern, then get back to Luthadel with the food
supplies.
And survive as
long as we can.

I suspect that
Alendi, the man Rashek killed, was himself a Misting—a Seeker.
Allomancy, however, was a different thing in those days, and much
more rare. The Allomancers alive in our day are the descendants of
the men who ate those few beads of Preservation's power. They formed
the foundation of the nobility, and were the first to name him
emperor.
The power in
these few beads was so concentrated that it could last through ten
centuries of breeding and inheritance.





62
SAZED STOOD
OUTSIDE THE ROOM, looking in. Spook lay in his bed, still
swaddled in bandages. The boy had not awakened since his ordeal, and
Sazed wasn't certain if he ever would. Even if he did live, he'd be
horribly scarred for the rest of his life.
Though, Sazed
thought, this proves one thing. The boy doesn't have pewter. If
Spook had been able to burn pewter, then he would have
healed far more quickly. Sazed had administered a vial of pewter just
in case, and it had made no difference. The boy hadn't mystically
become a Thug.
It was comforting,
in a way. It meant that Sazed's world still made sense.
Inside the room,
the girl—Beldre—sat at Spook's side. She came every day
to spend time with the lad. More time, even, than she spent with her
brother, Quellion. The Citizen had a broken arm and some other
wounds, but nothing lethal. Though Breeze ruled in Urteau, Quellion
was still an authority, and he seemed to have grown far more . . .
civil. He now seemed willing to consider an alliance with Elend.
It seemed strange
to Sazed that Quellion would become so accommodating. They had
entered his city, sown chaos, and nearly killed him. Now he listened
to their offers of peace? Sazed was suspicious, to be sure. Time
would tell.
Inside, Beldre
turned slightly, finally noticing Sazed at the doorway. She smiled,
standing.
"Please, Lady
Beldre," he said, entering. "Don't stand."
She seated herself
again as Sazed walked forward. He surveyed his bandage work on Spook,
checking the young man's condition, comparing notes from inside the
medical texts of his copperminds. Beldre watched quietly.
Once he was
finished, he turned to leave.
"Thank you,"
Beldre said from behind.
Sazed stopped.
She glanced at
Spook. "Do you think . . . I mean, has his condition changed?"
"I am afraid
that it has not, Lady Beldre. I cannot promise anything in regard to
his recovery."
She smiled faintly,
turning back toward the wounded lad. "He'll make it," she
said.
Sazed frowned.
"He's not just
a man," Beldre said. "He's something special. I don't know
what he did to bring my brother back, but Quellion is just like his
old self—the way he was before all of this insanity began. And
the city. The people have hope again. That's what Spook wanted."
Hope . . .
Sazed thought, studying the girl's eyes. She really does
love him.
It seemed, in a
way, silly to Sazed. How long had she known the boy? A few weeks?
During that short time, Spook had not only earned Beldre's love, but
had become a hero to the people of an entire city.
She sits and
hopes, having faith that he will recover, Sazed thought. Yet,
upon seeing him, the first thing I thought of was how relieved I was
that he wasn't a Pewterarm. Had Sazed really become that
callous? Just two years before, he had been willing to fall
hopelessly in love with a woman who had spent most of her life
chastising him. A woman with whom he had only had a few precious
days.
He turned and left
the room.
Sazed walked to his
quarters in the nobleman's mansion they had taken, their new home now
that their former residence was a burned-out ruin. It was nice to
have ordinary walls and steps again, rather than endless shelves
bounded by cavern walls.
On his desk sat the
open portfolio, its cloth-wrapped coverboard stained with ash. One
stack of pages sat to its left, and one stack sat to its right. There
were only ten pages left in the right stack.
Taking a deep
breath, Sazed approached and sat down. It was time to finish.
It was late morning
the next day before he set the final sheet onto the top of the left
stack. He'd moved quickly through these last ten, but he'd been able
to give them his undivided attention, not being distracted by riding
as he worked or other concerns. He felt that he'd given each one due
consideration.
He sat for a time,
feeling fatigued, and not just from lack of sleep. He felt . . .
numb. His task was done. After a year's work, he'd sifted through
each and every religion in his stack. And he'd eliminated every one.
It was odd, how
many common features they all had. Most claimed ultimate authority,
denouncing other faiths. Most taught of an afterlife, but could offer
no proof. Most taught about a god or gods, yet—again—had
little justification for their teachings. And every single one of
them was riddled with inconsistencies and logical fallacies.
How did men believe
in something that preached love on one hand, yet taught destruction
of unbelievers on the other? How did one rationalize belief with no
proof? How could they honestly expect him to have faith in something
that taught of miracles and wonders in the far past, but carefully
gave excuses for why such things didn't occur in the present day?
And then, of
course, there was the final flake of ash on the pile—the thing
that each and every faith had, in his opinion, failed to prove. All
taught that believers would be blessed. And all had absolutely no
answer as to why their gods had allowed the faithful to be captured,
imprisoned, enslaved, and slaughtered by a heretic known as Rashek,
the Lord Ruler.
The stack of pages
sat face down on the desk before him. They meant that there was no
truth. No faith that would bring Tindwyl back to him. Nothing
watching over men, contrary to what Spook had affirmed so strongly.
Sazed ran his fingers across the final page, and finally, the
depression he'd been fighting—barely holding at bay for so
long—was too strong for him to overcome. The portfolio had been
his final line of defense.
It was pain. That's
what the loss felt like. Pain and numbness at the same time; a
barb-covered wire twisting around his chest combined with an absolute
inability to do anything about it. He felt like huddling in a corner,
crying, and just letting himself die.
No! he
thought. There must be something. . . .
He reached under
his desk, trembling fingers seeking his sack of metalminds. However,
he didn't pull one of these out, but instead removed a large, thick
tome. He put it on the table beside his portfolio, then opened it to
a random page. Words written in two different hands confronted him.
One was careful and flowing. His own. The other was terse and
determined. Tindwyl's.
He rested his
fingers on the page. He and Tindwyl had compiled this book together,
deciphering the history, prophecies, and meanings surrounding the
Hero of Ages. Back before Sazed had stopped caring.
That's a lie,
he thought, forming a fist. Why do I lie to myself? I still
care. I never stopped caring. If I'd stopped caring, then I wouldn't
still be searching. If I didn't care so much, then being betrayed
wouldn't feel so painful.
Kelsier had spoken
of this. Then Vin had done the same. Sazed had never expected to have
similar feelings. Who was there that could hurt him so deeply that he
felt betrayed? He was not like other men. He acknowledged that not
out of arrogance, but out of simple self-knowledge. He forgave
people, perhaps to a fault. He simply wasn't the type to feel bitter.
He'd assumed,
therefore, that he would never have to deal with these emotions.
That's why he'd been so unprepared to be betrayed by the only thing
he couldn't accept as being flawed.
He couldn't
believe. If he believed, it meant that God—or the universe, or
whatever it was that watched over man—had failed. Better to
believe that there was nothing at all. Then, all of the world's
inadequacies were simply mere chance. Not caused by a god who had
failed them.
Sazed glanced at
his open tome, noticing a little slip of paper sticking out between
its pages. He pulled it free, surprised to find the picture of a
flower that Vin had given him, the one that Kelsier's wife had
carried. The one she'd used to give herself hope. To remind her of a
world that had existed before the coming of the Lord Ruler.
He glanced upward.
The ceiling was of wood, but red sunlight—refracted by the
window—sprayed across it. "Why?" he whispered. "Why
leave me like this? I studied everything about you. I learned the
religions of five hundred different peoples and sects. I
taught about you when other men had given up a thousand years before.
"Why leave me
without hope, when others can have faith? Why leave me to
wonder? Shouldn't I be more certain than any other? Shouldn't my
knowledge have protected me?"
And yet, his faith
had made him even more susceptible. That's what trust is,
Sazed thought. It's about giving someone else power over you.
Power to hurt you. That's why he'd given up his metalminds.
That's why he had decided to sort through the religions one at a
time, trying to find one that had no faults. Nothing to fail him.
It just made sense.
Better to not believe, rather than be proven wrong. Sazed looked back
down. Why did he think to talk to the heavens? There was nothing
there.
There never had
been.
Outside, in the
hallway, he could hear voices. "My dear doggie," Breeze
said, "surely you'll stay for another day."
"No,"
said TenSoon the kandra, speaking in his growling voice. "I must
find Vin as soon as possible."
Even the
kandra, Sazed thought. Even an inhuman creature has more
faith than I.
And yet, how could
they understand? Sazed closed his eyes tight, feeling a pair of tears
squeeze from the corners. How could anyone understand the pain of a
faith betrayed? He had believed. And yet, when he had needed
hope the most, he had found only emptiness.
He picked up the
book, then snapped closed his portfolio, locking the inadequate
summaries inside. He turned toward the hearth. Better to simply burn
it all.
Belief . . . He
remembered a voice from the past. His own voice, speaking to Vin on
that terrible day after Kelsier's death. Belief isn't simply a
thing for fair times and bright days, I think. What is belief—what
is faith—if you don't continue in it after failure. . . .
How innocent he had
been.
Better to trust
and be betrayed, Kelsier seemed to whisper. It had been one of
the Survivor's mottos. Better to love and be hurt.
Sazed gripped the
tome. It was such a meaningless thing. Its text could be changed by
Ruin at any time. And do I believe in that? Sazed thought
with frustration. Do I have faith in this Ruin, but not in
something better?
He stood quietly in
the room, holding the book, listening to Breeze and Ten-Soon outside.
The book was a symbol to him. It represented what he had once been.
It represented failure. He glanced upward again. Please, he
thought. I want to believe. I really do. I just . . . I just need
something. Something more than shadows and memories. Something real.
Something true.
Please?
"Farewell,
Soother," TenSoon said. "Give my regards to the Announcer."
Then, Sazed heard Breeze thump away. TenSoon padded down the hallway
on his quieter dog's feet.
Announcer. . .
.
Sazed froze.
That word. . .
.
Sazed stood,
stunned for a moment. Then, he threw his door open and burst into the
hallway. The door slammed back against the wall, making Breeze jump.
TenSoon stopped at the end of the hallway, near the stairs. He turned
back, looking at Sazed.
"What did you
call me?" Sazed demanded.
"The
Announcer," TenSoon said. "You are, are you not, the one
who pointed out Lady Vin as the Hero of Ages? That, then, is your
title."
Sazed fell to his
knees, slapping his tome—the one he had written with Tindwyl—on
the floor before him. He flipped through the pages, locating one in
particular, penned in his own hand. I thought myself the Holy
Witness, it said, the prophet foretold to discover the Hero
of Ages. They were the words of Kwaan, the man who had
originally named Alendi the Hero. From these writings, which were
their only clues about the original Terris religion, Sazed and the
others had gleaned what little they knew of the prophecies about the
Hero of Ages.
"What is
this?" Breeze asked, leaning down, scanning the words. "Hum.
Looks like you've got the wrong term, my dear doggie. Not 'Announcer'
at all, but 'Holy Witness.' "
Sazed looked up.
"This is one of the passages that Ruin changed, Breeze," he
said quietly. "When I wrote it, it read differently—but
Ruin altered it, trying to trick me and Vin into fulfilling his
prophecies. The skaa had started to call me the Holy Witness, their
own term. So Ruin retroactively changed Kwaan's writings so that they
seemed prophetic and reference me."
"Is that so?"
Breeze asked, rubbing his chin. "What did it say before?"
Sazed ignored the
question, instead meeting TenSoon's canine eyes. "How did you
know?" he demanded. "How do you know the words of the
ancient Terris prophecies?"
TenSoon fell back
on his haunches. "It strikes me as odd, Terrisman. There's one
great inconsistency in this all, a problem no one has ever
thought to point out. What happened to the packmen who traveled with
Rashek and Alendi up to the Well of Ascension?"
Rashek. The man who
had become the Lord Ruler.
Breeze stood up
straight. "That's easy, kandra," he said, waving his cane.
"Everyone knows that when the Lord Ruler took the throne of
Khlennium, he made his trusted friends into noblemen. That's why the
nobility of the Final Empire were so pampered—they were the
descendants of Rashek's good friends."
TenSoon sat
quietly.
No , Sazed
thought with wonder. No . . . that couldn't be! "He
couldn't have made those packmen into nobles."
"Why ever
not?" Breeze asked.
"Because the
nobility gained Allomancy," Sazed said, standing. "Rashek's
friends were Feruchemists. If he'd made them into noblemen,
then . . ."
"Then they
could have challenged him," TenSoon said. "They could have
become both Allomancers and Feruchemists as he was, and had his same
powers."
"Yes,"
Sazed said. "He spent ten centuries trying to breed Feruchemy
out of the Terris population—all in fear that someday
someone would be born with both Feruchemy and Allomancy! His friends
who went to the Well with him would have been dangerous, since they
were obviously powerful Feruchemists, and they knew what Rashek had
done to Alendi. Rashek would have had to do something else with them.
Something to sequester them, perhaps even kill them. . . ."
"No,"
TenSoon said. "He didn't kill them. You call the Father a
monster, but he was not an evil man. He didn't kill his friends,
though he did recognize the threat their powers posed to him. So, he
offered them a bargain, speaking directly to their minds while he was
holding the power of creation."
"What
bargain?" Breeze asked, obviously confused.
"Immortality,"
TenSoon said quietly. "In exchange for their Feruchemy. They
gave it up, along with something else."
Sazed stared at the
creature in the hallway, a creature who thought like a man but had
the form of a beast. "They gave up their humanity," Sazed
whispered.
TenSoon nodded.
"They live
on?" Sazed asked, stepping forward. "The Lord Ruler's
companions? The very Terrismen who climbed to the Well with him?"
"We call them
the First Generation," TenSoon said. "The founders of the
kandra people. The Father transformed every living Feruchemist into a
mistwraith, beginning that race. His good friends, however, he
returned to sentience with a few Hemalurgic spikes. You've done your
work poorly, Keeper. I expected that you'd drag this out of me long
before I had to leave."
I've been a
fool, Sazed thought, blinking away tears. Such a fool.
"What?"
Breeze asked, frowning. "What's going on? Sazed? My dear man,
why are you so flustered? What do this creature's words mean?"
"They mean
hope," Sazed said, pushing into his room, hurriedly throwing
some of his clothing into a travel pack.
"Hope?"
Breeze asked, peeking in.
Sazed looked back,
toward where Breeze stood. The kandra had walked up, and stood behind
him in the hallway. "The Terris religion, Breeze," Sazed
said. "The thing my sect was founded for, the thing my people
have spent lifetimes searching to discover. It lives on. Not in
written words that can be corrupted or changed. But in the minds of
men who actually practiced it. The Terris faith is not dead!"
There was one more
religion to add to his list. His quest was not yet over.
"Quickly,
Keeper," TenSoon said. "I was prepared to go without you,
since everyone agreed that you had stopped caring about these things.
However, if you will come, I will show you the way to my Homeland—it
is along the path I must travel to find Vin. Hopefully, you will be
able to convince the First Generation of the things I have not."
"And that is?"
Sazed asked, still packing.
"That the end
has arrived."

Ruin tried many
times to get spikes into other members of the crew. Though some of
what happened makes it seem like it was easy for him to gain control
of people, it really was not.
Sticking the
metal in just the right place—at the right time—was
incredibly difficult, even for a subtle creature like Ruin. For
instance, he tried very hard to spike both Elend and Yomen. Elend
managed to avoid it each time, as he did on the field outside of the
small village that contained the next-to-last storage cache.
Ruin did
actually manage to get a spike into Yomen, once. Yomen, however,
removed the spike before Ruin got a firm grip on him. It was much
easier for Ruin to get a hold on people who were passionate and
impulsive than it was for him to hold on to people who were logical
and prone to working through their actions in their minds.





63
"WHAT
I DON'T UNDERSTAND," Vin said, "is why you chose
me. You had a thousand years and hundreds of thousands of people to
choose from. Why lead me to the Well of Ascension to free
you?"
She was in her
cell, sitting on her cot—which now lay legless on the floor,
having collapsed when she removed the screws. She'd asked for a new
one. She'd been ignored.
Ruin turned toward
her. He came often, wearing Reen's body, still indulging himself in
what Vin could only assume was a kind of gloating. As he often did,
however, he ignored her question. Instead, he turned to the east,
eyes seeming as if they could see directly through the cell wall.
"I wish you
could see it," he said. "The ashfalls have grown beautiful
and deep, as if the sky itself has shattered, raining down shards of
its corpse in flakes of black. You feel the ground tremble?"
Vin didn't respond.
"Those quakes
are the earth's final sighs," Ruin said. "Like an old man,
moaning as he dies, calling for his children so that he can pass on
his last bits of wisdom. The very ground is pulling itself apart. The
Lord Ruler did much of this himself. You can blame him, if you wish."
Vin perked up. She
didn't draw attention to herself by asking more questions, but
instead just let Ruin ramble on. Again, she noted just how human
some of his mannerisms seemed.
"He thought he
could solve the problems himself," Ruin continued. "He
rejected me, you know."
And that
happened exactly a thousand years ago, Vin thought. A
thousand years has passed since Alendi failed in his quest; a
thousand years since Rashek took the power for himself and became the
Lord Ruler. That's part of the answer to my question. The glowing
liquid at the Well of Ascension—it was gone by the time I
finished freeing Ruin. It must have disappeared after Rashek used it
too.
A thousand
years. Time for the Well to regenerate its power? But what was that
power? Where did it come from?
"The Lord
Ruler didn't really save the world," Ruin continued. "He
just postponed its destruction—and, in doing so, he helped me.
That's the way it must always be, as I told you. When men think they
are helping the world, they actually do more harm than good. Just
like you. You tried to help, but you just ended up freeing me."
Ruin glanced at
her, then smiled in a fatherly way. She didn't react.
"The
ashmounts," Ruin continued, "the dying landscape, the
broken people—those were all Rashek's. The twisting of men to
become koloss, kandra, and Inquisitor, all his . . ."
"But, you
hated him," Vin said. "He didn't free you—so you had
to wait another thousand years."
"True,"
Ruin said. "But a thousand years is not much time. Not much time
at all. Besides, I couldn't refuse to help Rashek. I help everyone,
for my power is a tool—the only tool by which things can
change."
It's all
ending, Vin thought. It really is. I don't have time to sit
and wait. I need to do something. Vin stood, causing Ruin to
glance toward her as she walked to the front of the cell. "Guards!"
she called. Her voice echoed in her own chamber. "Guards!"
she repeated.
Eventually, she
heard a thump outside. "What?" a rough voice demanded.
"Tell Yomen
that I want to deal."
There was a pause.
"Deal?"
the guard finally asked.
"Yes,"
Vin said. "Tell him I have information that I want to give him."
She wasn't certain
how to read the guard's response, since it was simply more silence.
She thought she heard him walking away, but without tin, she couldn't
tell.
Eventually,
however, the guard returned. Ruin watched her, curious, as the door
unlocked and then opened. The customary troop of soldiers stood
outside.
"Come with
us."
* * *
As Vin entered
Yomen's audience chamber, she was immediately struck by the
differences in the man. He looked much more haggard than he had the
last time they'd met, as if he'd gone far too long without sleep.
But . . . he's
Mistborn, Vin thought with confusion. That means he could
burn pewter to keep that fatigue out of his eyes.
Why doesn't he?
Unless . . . he can't burn it. Unless there's only one metal
available to him.
She'd always been
taught that there was no such thing as an atium Misting. But, more
and more, she was realizing that the Lord Ruler perpetuated a lot of
misinformation to keep himself in control and in power. She had to
learn to stop depending on what she'd been told was true,
and focus on the facts as she found them.
Yomen watched her
as she entered, guards surrounding her. She could read the
expectation of a trick in his eyes—yet, as always, he waited
for her to act first. Hovering very close to the edge of danger
seemed his way. The guards took stations at the doors, leaving her
standing in the middle of the room.
"No manacles?"
she asked.
"No,"
Yomen said. "I don't expect you to be here long. The guards tell
me that you've offered information."
"I have."
"Well,"
Yomen said, arms clasped behind his back, "I told them to bring
you to me if they even so much as suspected a trick. Apparently, they
didn't believe your pleas that you want to deal. I wonder why."
He raised an eyebrow toward her.
"Ask me a
question," Vin said. To the side, Ruin trailed through the wall,
stepping with an idle, unconcerned gait.
"Very well,"
Yomen said. "How does Elend control the koloss?"
"Allomancy,"
Vin said. "Emotional Allomancy, when used on a koloss, will
bring them under the Allomancer's control."
"I find that
hard to believe," Yomen said flatly. "If it were that
simple, someone other than yourself would have discovered it."
"Most
Allomancers are too weak to manage it," Vin said. "You need
to use a metal that enhances your power."
"There is no
such metal."
"You know of
aluminum?"
Yomen paused, but
Vin could see in his eyes that he did. "Duralumin is the
Allomantic alloy of aluminum," Vin said. "Where aluminum
dampens the power of other metals, duralumin enhances them. Mix
duralumin and zinc or brass, then Pull on the emotions of a koloss,
and he will be yours."
Yomen didn't
dismiss her comments as lies. Ruin, however, strolled forward,
walking around Vin in a circle.
"Vin, Vin.
What is your game now?" Ruin asked, amused. "Lead him on
with little tidbits, then betray him?"
Yomen apparently
came to the same conclusion. "Your facts are interesting,
Empress, but completely unprovable in my present situation.
Therefore, they are—"
"There were
five of these storage caverns," Vin said, stepping forward. "We
found the others. They led us here."
Yomen shook his
head. "And? Why should I care?"
"Your Lord
Ruler planned something for those caverns—you can tell that
much from the plate he left here in this one. He says that he came up
with no way to fight what is happening to us in the world, but do you
believe that? I feel there has to be more, some clue hidden in the
text of all five plaques."
"You expect me
to believe that you care what the Lord Ruler wrote?"
Yomen asked. "You, his purported murderer?"
"I couldn't
care less about him," Vin admitted. "But Yomen, you have
to believe that I care what happens to the people of the empire! If
you've gathered any intelligence about Elend or myself, you know that
is true."
"Your Elend is
a man who thinks far too highly of himself," Yomen said. "He
has read many books, and assumes that his learning makes him capable
of being a king. You . . . I still don't know what to think about
you." His eyes showed a bit of the hatred she had seen in him
during their last meeting. "You claim to have killed the Lord
Ruler. Yet . . . he couldn't really have died. You're part of all
this, somehow."
That's it, Vin
thought. That's my in. "He wanted us to meet," Vin
said. She didn't believe it, but Yomen would.
Yomen raised an
eyebrow.
"Can't you
see?" Vin said. "Elend and I discovered the other storage
caverns, the first one under Luthadel itself. Then, we came here.
This was the last of the five. The end of the trail. For
some reason, the Lord Ruler wanted to lead us here. To you."
Yomen stood for a
few moments. To the side, Ruin mimed applause.
"Send for
Lellin," Yomen said, turning toward one of his soldiers. "Tell
him to bring his maps."
The soldier saluted
and left. Yomen turned to Vin, still frowning. "This is not to
be an exchange. You will give me the information I request, then I
will decide what to do with it."
"Fine,"
Vin said. "But, you yourself just said that I was connected to
all of this. It's all connected, Yomen. The mists, the
koloss, me, you, the storage caverns, the ash . . ."
He flinched
slightly as Vin mentioned that last one.
"The ash is
getting worse, isn't it?" she asked. "Falling more
thickly?"
Yomen nodded.
"We were
always worried about the mists," Vin said. "But the ash,
it's going to be what kills us. It will block the sunlight, bury our
cities, cover our streets, choke our fields. . . ."
"The Lord
Ruler won't let that happen," Yomen said.
"And if he
really is dead?"
Yomen met her eyes.
"Then you have doomed us all."
Doomed. . . .
The Lord Ruler had said something similar right before Vin had
killed him. She shivered, waiting in awkward silence, suffering
Ruin's smiling stare until a scribe scuttled into the room, bearing
several rolled maps.
Yomen took one of
the maps, waving the man away. He spread it out on a table, waving
Vin forward. "Show me," he said, stepping back to keep out
of her reach as she approached.
She picked up a
piece of charcoal, then began to mark the locations of the storage
caverns. Luthadel. Satren. Vetitan. Urteau. All five that she had
found—all near the Central Dominance, one in the center, the
other four forming a box around it. She put a final "X"
beside Fadrex City.
Then, with charcoal
gripped in her fingers, she noticed something. Sure are a lot of
mines shown on this map around Fadrex, she thought. A lot of
metal in the area.
"Step back,"
Yomen said.
Vin moved away. He
approached, scanning the map. Vin stood in silence, thinking. Elend's
scribes could never find a pattern to the cache locations. Two were
in small cities, two in large ones. Some near canals, others not. The
scribes claimed that they just didn't have a large enough set from
which to determine patterns.
"This seems
completely random," Yomen said, echoing her own thoughts.
"I didn't make
up those locations, Yomen," she said, folding her arms. "Your
spies can confirm where Elend has taken his armies and sent his
emissaries."
"Not all of us
have the resources for extensive spy networks, Empress," Yomen
said flatly, looking back at the map. "There should be some
pattern. . . ."
Vetitan, Vin
thought. The place where we found the cavern just before this
one. It was a mining town as well. And Urteau too.
"Yomen?"
she said, looking up. "Does one of those maps list mineral
deposits?"
"Of course,"
he said distractedly. "We are the Canton of Resource,
after all."
"Get it out."
Yomen raised an
eyebrow, indicating what he thought of her giving him orders.
However, he waved for his scribe to do as she had requested. A second
map overlaid the first, and Vin walked forward. Yomen immediately
shied backward, keeping out of reach.
He has good
instincts, for a bureaucrat , she thought, slipping the charcoal
out from underneath the map. She quickly made her five marks again.
With each one, her hand grew more tense. Each cavern was in a rocky
area, near metal mines. Even Luthadel bore rich mineral deposits.
Lore said that the Lord Ruler had constructed his capital in that
location because of the mineral content in the area,
particularly the groundwater. That much the better for Allomancers.
"What are you
trying to imply?" Yomen asked. He'd edged close enough to see
what she'd marked.
"This is the
connection," Vin said. "He built his storages near sources
of metal."
"Or, it was
simple chance."
"No," Vin
said, looking up, glancing at Ruin. "No, metal equals Allomancy,
Yomen. There's a pattern here."
Yomen waved her
away again, approaching the map. He snorted. "You've included
marks near each of the most productive mines in the inner empire. You
expect me to believe that you're not just playing me, offering some
phantom 'evidence' that these really are the locations of the storage
caverns?"
Vin ignored him.
Metal. The words of Kwaan were written in metal, because he said
they were safe. Safe. Safe from being changed, we assumed.
Or, did he mean
safe from being read?
The Lord Ruler had
drawn his maps on metal plates.
So, what if
Ruin couldn't find the storages on his own because of the metal
shielding them? He would have needed someone to lead him. Someone to
visit each one, read the map it contained, then lead him on. . . .
Lord Ruler!
We've made the same mistake again! We did exactly what he wanted. No
wonder he's let us live!
However, instead of
feeling ashamed, this time Vin felt herself growing angry. She
glanced over at Ruin, who stood there with his air of cosmic wisdom.
His knowing eyes, his fatherly tone, and his deific arrogance.
Not again, Vin
thought, gritting her teeth. This time, I'm on to him. That means
I can trick him. But . . . I need to know why. Why was he so
interested in the storages? What is it he needs before he wins this
battle? What is the reason he's waited so long?
Suddenly, the
answer seemed obvious to her. As she examined her feelings, she
realized that one of her main reasons for searching out the caches
had repeatedly been discredited by Elend. Yet, Vin had continued to
pursue the caches, searching for this one thing. She'd felt,
for reasons she couldn't explain, that it was important.
The thing that had
driven the imperial economy for a thousand years. The most powerful
of Allomantic metals.
Atium.
Why had she been so
infatuated with it? Elend and Yomen were both right—atium was
of little importance in the current world. But, her feelings denied
that. Why? Was it because Ruin wanted it, and Vin had some
unexplained connection to him?
The Lord Ruler had
said Ruin couldn't read her mind. But she knew that he could affect
her emotions. Change how she regarded things, push her forward. Drive
her to search out the thing he wanted.
Looking at the
emotions that had affected her, she could see Ruin's plan, the way he
had manipulated her, the way he thought. Ruin wanted the atium! And,
with a chill of terror, Vin realized that she had led him right to
it. No wonder he was so smug before! Vin thought. No
wonder he assumed that he'd won!
Why would a
god-like force would be so interested in a simple thing like an
Allomantic metal? The question made her doubt her conclusions
slightly. But at that moment, the doors to the chamber burst open.
And an Inquisitor
stood beyond them.
Immediately, Yomen
and the soldiers all fell to one knee. Vin took an involuntary step
backward. The creature stood tall, like most of its kind, and still
wore the gray robes of its pre-Collapse office. The bald head was
wrinkled with intricate tattoos, mostly black, one stark red. And, of
course, there were the spikes driven point-first through its eyes.
One of the spikes had been pounded in farther than the other,
crushing the socket around the spikehead. The creature's face,
twisted by an inhuman sneer, had once been familiar to Vin.
"Marsh?"
Vin whispered in horror.
"My lord,"
Yomen said, spreading his hands out. "You have finally come! I
sent messengers, searching for—"
"Silence,"
Marsh said in a grating voice, striding forward. "On your feet,
obligator."
Yomen hastily
stood. Marsh glanced at Vin, smiled slightly, but then pointedly
ignored her. He did, however, look directly at Ruin and bow his head
in subservience.
Vin shivered.
Marsh's features, even twisted as they were, reminded her of his
brother. Kelsier.
"You are about
to be attacked, obligator," Marsh said, sweeping forward,
throwing open the large window at the other side of the room. Through
it, Vin could see over the rocky shelves to where Elend's army camped
beside the canal.
Except, there was
no canal. There were no rocky shelves. Everything was just a uniform
black. Ash filled the sky, as thick as a snowstorm.
Lord Ruler! Vin
thought. It's gotten so bad!
Yomen hurried over
to the window. "Attacked, my lord? But, they haven't even broken
camp!"
"The koloss
will attack in surprise," the Inquisitor said. "They don't
need to form up ranks—they will simply charge."
Yomen froze for a
second, then turned to his soldiers. "Hasten to the defenses.
Gather the men on the forward rises!"
Soldiers scuttled
from the room. Vin stood quietly. The man I know as Marsh is
dead, she thought. He tried to kill Sazed, now he's fully
one of them. Ruin has . . .
Has taken
control of him. . . .
An idea began to
spark in her mind.
"Quickly,
obligator," Marsh said. "I did not come to protect your
foolish little city. I've come for the thing you discovered in that
cache."
"My lord?"
Yomen said, surprised.
"Your atium,
Yomen," the Inquisitor said. "Give it to me. It cannot
be in this city when that attack comes, just in case you fall. I
shall take it someplace safe."
Vin closed her
eyes.
"My . . .
lord?" Yomen finally said. "You are, of course, welcome to
anything I possess. But, there was no atium in the storage cache.
Just the seven beads I had gathered myself, held as a reserve for the
Canton of Resource."
Vin opened her
eyes. "What?"
"Impossible!"
Marsh roared. "But, you told the girl earlier that you had it!"
Yomen paled.
"Misdirection, my lord. She seemed convinced that I had some
wealth of atium, so I let her think that she was right."
"NO!"
Vin jumped at the
sudden yell. However, Yomen didn't even flinch—and a second
later, she realized why. Ruin was the one who had screamed. He had
become indistinct, losing Reen's form, his figure blossoming outward
in a kind of tempest of whirling darkness. Almost like mist, only
far, far blacker.
She'd seen that
blackness before. She'd walked through it, in the cavern beneath
Luthadel, on her way to the Well of Ascension.
A second later,
Ruin was back. He looked like Reen again. He folded his arms behind
his back, and didn't look at her, as if trying to pretend that he had
not lost control. In his eyes, however, she could see frustration.
Anger. She edged away from him—edging closer to Marsh.
"You fool!"
Marsh said, walking away from her, speaking to Yomen. "You
idiot!"
Damn, Vin
thought in annoyance.
"I . . ."
Yomen said, confused. "My lord, why do you care for atium? It is
worthless without Allomancers and house politicians to pay for it."
"You know
nothing," Marsh snapped. Then, he smiled. "But you are
doomed. Yes . . . doomed indeed. . . ."
Outside, she could
see that Elend's army was breaking camp. Yomen turned back to the
window, and Vin edged closer, ostensibly to give herself a better
look. Elend's forces were gathering—men and koloss. Most
likely, they had noticed the buildup of city defenses, and had
realized that they'd lost any opportunity for surprise.
"He's going to
ravage this city," Ruin said, stepping up beside Vin. "Your
Elend is a good servant, child. One of my finest. You should be proud
of him."
"So many
koloss . . ." she heard Yomen whisper. "My lord, there is
no way we can fight so many. We need your help."
"Why should I
help you?" Marsh asked. "You who fail to deliver to me what
I need?"
"But I've
remained faithful," Yomen said. "When all others abandoned
the Lord Ruler, I have continued to serve him."
"The Lord
Ruler is dead," Marsh said with a snort. "He was an
unprofitable servant as well."
Yomen paled.
"Let this city
burn before the wrath of forty thousand koloss," Marsh said.
Forty thousand
koloss, Vin thought. He'd found more, somewhere. Attacking
seemed the logical thing to do—he could finally capture the
city, perhaps giving Vin a chance to escape in the chaos. Very
logical, very smart. And yet, suddenly, Vin became sure of one thing.
"Elend won't
attack," she announced.
Six eyes—two
steel, two flesh, and two incorporeal—turned toward her.
"Elend won't
loose that many koloss upon the city," she said. "He's
trying to intimidate you, Yomen. And you should listen. Would you
still obey this creature, this Inquisitor? He disdains you. He wants
you to die. Join with us instead."
Yomen frowned.
"You could
fight him with me," Vin said. "You're an Allomancer. These
monsters can be defeated."
Marsh smiled.
"Idealism from you, Vin?"
"Idealism?"
she asked, facing the creature. "You think it's idealistic to
believe I can kill an Inquisitor? You know I've done it before."
Marsh waved a
dismissive hand. "I'm not talking about your foolish threats.
I'm talking about him." He nodded toward the army
outside. "Your Elend belongs to Ruin, just as I do—just as
you do. We all resist, but we all bow before him eventually. Only
then do we understand the beauty there is in destruction."
"Your god does
not control Elend," Vin said. "He keeps trying to claim
that he does, but that only makes him a liar. Or, perhaps, something
of an idealist himself."
Yomen watched,
confused.
"And if he
does attack?" Marsh asked with a quiet, eager voice.
"What would that mean, Vin? What if he does send his koloss
against this city in a blood frenzy, sends them to slaughter and
kill, all so that he can get what he thinks he needs so
badly? Atium and food couldn't get him to come in . . . but you? How
would that make you feel? You killed for him. What makes you think
that Elend won't do the same for you?"
Vin closed her
eyes. Memories of her assault upon Cett's tower returned to her.
Memories of wanton killing, Zane at her side. Memories of fire, and
death, and an Allomancer loosed.
She'd never killed
like that again.
She opened her
eyes. Why wouldn't Elend attack? Attacking made so much sense. He
knew he could take the city easily. However, he also knew he had
trouble controlling the koloss when they reached too great a frenzy.
. . .
"Elend won't
attack," she said quietly. "Because he's a better person
than I am."

One might
notice that Ruin did not send his Inquisitors to Fadrex until after
Yomen had—apparently—confirmed that the atium was there
in the city. Why not send them as soon as the final cache was
located? Where were his minions in all of this?
One must
realize that, in Ruin's mind, all men were his minions, particularly
those whom he could manipulate directly. He didn't send an Inquisitor
because they were busy doing other tasks. Instead, he sent someone
who—in his mind—was exactly the same thing as an
Inquisitor.
He tried to
spike Yomen, failed, and by that time, Elend's army had arrived. So,
he used a different pawn to investigate the cache for him and
discover if the atium really was there or not. He didn't commit too
many resources to the city at first, fearing a deception on the Lord
Ruler's part. Like him, I still wonder if the caches were, in part,
intended for just that purpose—to distract Ruin and keep him
occupied.





64
". . .
AND THAT'S WHY YOU ABSOLUTELY must get that message
sent, Spook. The pieces of this thing are all spinning about, cast to
the wind. You have a clue that nobody else does. Send it flying for
me."
Spook nodded,
feeling fuzzy. Where was he? What was going on? And why, suddenly,
did everything hurt so much?
"Good lad. You
did well, Spook. I'm proud."
He tried to nod
again, but everything was fuzz and blackness. He coughed, prompting
some gasps from a place far off. He groaned. Parts of him hurt quite
sharply, though others just tingled. Still others . . . well, those
he couldn't feel at all, though he thought he should have
been able to.
I was dreaming,
he realized as he slowly came to consciousness. Why have I
been asleep? Was I on watch? Should I go on watch? The shop . . .
His thoughts
trailed off as he opened his eyes. There was someone standing above
him. A face. One . . . quite a bit uglier than the face he'd hoped to
see.
"Breeze?"
he tried to say, though it came out as a croak.
"Ha!"
Breeze said with uncharacteristic tears in his eyes. "He is
waking!"
Another face
hovered over him, and Spook smiled. That's the one he'd been
waiting for. Beldre. "What's going on?" Spook whispered.
Hands brought
something to his lips—a water skin. They poured carefully,
giving him a drink. He coughed, but got it down. "Why . . . why
can't I move?" Spook asked. The only thing he seemed able to
twitch was his left hand.
"Your body is
being held in casts and bandages, Spook," Beldre said. "Sazed's
orders."
"The burns,"
Breeze said. "Well, they aren't that bad, but . . ."
"To hell with
the burns," Spook croaked. "I'm alive. I wasn't expecting
that."
Breeze looked up at
Beldre, smiling.
Send it flying.
. . .
"Where is
Sazed?" Spook asked.
"You should
really try to rest," Beldre said, rubbing his cheek softly.
"You've been through a lot."
"And slept
through more, I expect," Spook said. "Sazed?"
"Gone, my dear
boy," Breeze said. "He went off south with Vin's kandra."
Vin.
Feet clomped across
the floor, and a second later, Captain Goradel's face appeared beside
the other two. The square-jawed soldier smiled broadly. "Survivor
of the Flames indeed!"
You have a clue
that nobody else does. . . .
"How is the
city?" Spook asked.
"Mostly safe,"
Beldre said. "The canals flooded, and my brother organized fire
brigades. Most of the buildings that burned weren't inhabited
anyway."
"You saved it,
my lord," Goradel said.
I'm proud. . .
.
"The ash is
falling even more thickly, isn't it?" Spook asked.
The three above
shared looks. Their troubled expressions were enough of a
confirmation.
"We're getting
a lot of refugees into the city," Beldre said. "From
surrounding cities and villages, some as far as Luthadel. . . ."
"I need to
send a message," Spook said. "To Vin."
"All right,"
Breeze said soothingly. "We'll do that as soon as you are
better."
"Listen to me,
Breeze," Spook said, staring up at the ceiling, unable to do
much more than twitch. "Something was controlling me and the
Citizen. I saw it—the thing that Vin released at the
Well of Ascension. The thing that is bringing ash down to destroy us.
It wanted this city, but we fought it off. Now, I need to warn Vin."
That's what he'd
been sent to do in Urteau. Find information, then report it back to
Vin and Elend. He was only just beginning to understand how important
a duty that could be.
"Travel is
difficult right now, my boy," Breeze said. "It isn't
exactly perfect conditions for sending messages."
"Rest some
more," Beldre said. "We'll worry about it when you're
healed."
Spook gritted his
teeth in frustration.
You must
get that message sent, Spook. . . .
"I'll take
it," Goradel said quietly.
Spook looked to the
side. Sometimes, it was easy to ignore the soldier, with his simple,
straightforward manner and his pleasant demeanor. However, the
determination in his voice made Spook smile.
"Lady Vin
saved my life," Goradel said. "The night of the Survivor's
rebellion, she could have left me to die at the hands of the mob. She
could have killed me herself. But she took the time to tell me that
she understood what I'd been through, and convinced me to switch
sides. If she needs this information, Survivor, then I will
get it to her, or I will die trying."
Spook tried to nod,
but his head was held tight by the bandages and wrappings. He flexed
his hand. It seemed to work . . . or, at least, work well enough.
He met Goradel's
eyes. "Go to the armory and have a sheet of metal pounded thin,"
Spook said. "Then, return here with something I can use to
scratch the metal. These words must be written in steel, and I cannot
speak them aloud."

In those
moments when the Lord Ruler both held the power at the Well and was
feeling it drain away from him, he understood a great many things. He
saw the power of Feruchemy, and rightly feared it. Many of the Terris
people, he knew, would reject him as the Hero, for he didn't fulfill
their prophecies well. They'd see him as a usurper who killed the
Hero they sent. Which, in truth, he was.
I think, over
the years, Ruin would subtly twist him and make him do terrible
things to his own people. But at the beginning, I suspect his
decision against them was motivated more by logic than emotion. He
was about to unveil a grand power in the Mistborn.
He could have,
I suppose, kept Allomancy secret and used Feruchemists as his primary
warriors and assassins. However, I think he was wise to choose as he
did. Feruchemists, by the nature of their powers, have a tendency
toward scholarship. With their incredible memories, they would have
been very difficult to control over the centuries. Indeed, they were
difficult to control, even when he suppressed them. Allomancy not
only provided a spectacular new ability without that drawback, it
offered a mystical power he could use to bribe kings to his side.





65
ELEND STOOD
UPON A SMALL ROCK outcropping to look over his troops.
Below, the koloss stalked forward, stomping a pathway in the ash for
his humans to use after the initial koloss assault.
Elend waited, Ham
standing just a few steps below.
I wear white,
Elend thought. The color of purity. I try to represent what
is good and right. For my men.
"The koloss
should have no trouble with those fortifications," Ham said
quietly. "They can leap to the top of city walls; they'll be
able to climb those broken stone ridges."
Elend nodded. There
probably wouldn't be any need for the human soldiers to attack. With
his koloss alone, Elend had the numerical advantage, and it was
unlikely Yomen's soldiers had ever fought the creatures before.
The koloss sensed a
fight. He could feel them getting excited. They strained against him,
wishing to attack.
"Ham," he
said, glancing down. "Is this right?"
Ham shrugged. "This
move does make sense, El," he said, rubbing his chin. "Attacking
is our only real chance of saving Vin. And, we can't hold the
siege—not any longer." Ham paused, then shook his head,
his tone of voice taking on that uncertain quality it always did when
he considered one of his logic problems. "Yet, loosing a group
of koloss on a city does seem immoral. I wonder if you'll be able to
control them, once they begin to rampage. Is saving Vin worth the
possibility of killing even one innocent child? I don't know. Then
again, maybe we'll save more children by bringing them into our
empire. . . ."
I shouldn't
have bothered to ask Ham, Elend thought. He never has been
able to give a straight answer. He looked out over the field,
blue koloss against a plain of black. With tin, he could see men
cowering on the tops of the Fadrex City ridges.
"No," Ham
said.
Elend glanced down
at the Thug.
"No," Ham
repeated. "We shouldn't attack."
"Ham?"
Elend said, feeling a surreal amusement. "Did you actually come
to a conclusion?"
Ham nodded. "Yes."
He didn't offer explanation or rationalization.
Elend looked up.
What would Vin do? His first instinct was to think that
she'd attack. But then, he remembered when he had discovered her
years before, after she'd assaulted Cett's tower. She'd been huddled
up in a corner, crying.
No, he
thought. No, she wouldn't do this thing. Not to protect me. She's
learned better.
"Ham," he
said, surprising himself. "Tell the men to pull back and
disassemble camp. We're returning to Luthadel."
Ham looked back,
surprised—as if he hadn't expected Elend to come to the same
conclusion he had. "And Vin?"
"I'm not going
to attack this city, Ham," Elend said. "I won't conquer
these people, even if it is for their own good. We'll find another
way to get Vin free."
Ham smiled. "Cett's
going to be furious."
Elend shrugged.
"He's a paraplegic. What's he going to do? Bite us? Come on,
let's get down off this rock and go deal with Luthadel."
"They're
pulling back, my lord," the soldier said.
Vin sighed in
relief. Ruin stood, expression unreadable, hands folded behind his
back. Marsh stood with one hand claw-like on Yomen's shoulder, both
watching out the window.
Ruin brought in
an Inquisitor, she thought. He must have grown tired of my
efforts to get the truth out of Yomen, and instead brought in someone
he knew the obligator would obey.
"This is very
odd," Ruin finally said.
Vin took a breath,
then gambled. "Don't you see?" she asked quietly.
Ruin turned toward
her.
She smiled. "You
really don't understand, do you?"
This time, Marsh
turned as well.
"You think I
didn't realize?" Vin asked. "You think I didn't know you
were after the atium all along? That you were following us from
cavern to cavern, Pushing on my emotions, forcing me to search it out
for you? You were so obvious. Your koloss always drew close to a city
only after we discovered that it was the next in line. You
moved in to threaten us, make us move more quickly, but you never got
your koloss there too fast. The thing is, we knew all
along."
"Impossible,"
Ruin whispered.
"No," Vin
said. "Quite possible. Atium is metal, Ruin. You can't see it.
Your vision gets fuzzy when too much of it is around, doesn't it?
Metal is your power; you use it to make Inquisitors, but it's like
light to you—blinding. You never saw when we actually
discovered the atium. You just followed along with our ruse."
Marsh let go of
Yomen, then rushed across the room, grabbing Vin by the arms.
"WHERE IS
IT!" the Inquisitor demanded, lifting her, shaking her.
She laughed,
distracting Marsh as she carefully reached for his sash. Marsh shook
her too much, however, and her fingers couldn't find their mark.
"You will tell
me where the atium is, child," Ruin said calmly. "Haven't I
explained this? There is no fighting against me. You think yourself
clever, perhaps, but you really don't understand. You don't even know
what that atium is."
Vin shook her head.
"You think I'd actually lead you to it?"
Marsh shook her
again, rattling her, making her grit her teeth. When he stopped, her
vision swam. To the side, she could barely make out Yomen watching
with a frown. "Yomen," she said. "Your people are safe
now—can you not finally trust that Elend is a good man?"
Marsh tossed her
aside. She hit hard, rolling.
"Ah, child,"
Ruin said, kneeling down beside her. "Must I prove that
you cannot fight me?"
"Yomen!"
Marsh said, turning. "Prepare your men. I want you to order an
assault!"
"What?"
Yomen said. "My lord, an assault?"
"Yes,"
Marsh said. "I want you to take all of your soldiers and have
them attack Elend Venture's position."
Yomen paled. "Leave
behind our fortifications? Charge an army of koloss?"
"That is my
order," Marsh said.
Yomen stood quietly
for a moment.
"Yomen . . ."
Vin said, crawling to her knees. "Don't you see that he's
manipulating you?"
Yomen didn't
respond. He looked troubled. What would make him even consider an
order like that?
"You see,"
Ruin whispered. "You see my power? You see how I manipulate even
their faith?"
"Give the
order," Yomen said, turning from Vin, facing his soldier
captains. "Have the men attack. Tell them that the Lord Ruler
will protect them."
"Well,"
Ham said, standing beside Elend in the camp. "I didn't expect
that."
Elend nodded
slowly, watching the flood of men pour through the Fadrex gateway.
Some stumbled in the deep ash; others pushed their way forward, their
charge hampered to a slow crawl.
"Some stayed
back," Elend said, pointing up at the wall top. Not having tin,
Ham wouldn't be able to see the men who lined the wall, but he'd
trust Elend's words. Around them, Elend's human soldiers were
breaking camp. The koloss still waited silently in their positions,
surrounding the camp.
"What is Yomen
thinking?" Ham asked. "He's throwing an inferior force
against an army of koloss?"
Like we did,
attacking the koloss camp back in Vetitan. Something about it
made Elend very uncomfortable.
"Retreat,"
Elend said.
"Huh?"
Ham asked.
"I said sound
the retreat!" Elend said. "Abandon position. Pull the
soldiers back!"
At his silent
command, the koloss began to charge away from the city. Yomen's
soldiers were still pushing their way through the ash. Elend's
koloss, however, would clear the way for his men. They should be able
to stay ahead.
"Strangest
retreat I've ever seen," Ham noted, but moved back to
give the orders.
That's it,
Elend thought in annoyance. It's time to figure out what the
hell is going on in that city.
Yomen was crying.
They were small, quiet tears. He stood straight-backed, not facing
the window.
He fears that
he's ordered his men to their deaths, Vin thought. She moved up
to him, limping slightly from where she'd hit the ground. Marsh stood
watching out the window. Ruin eyed her curiously.
"Yomen,"
she said.
Yomen turned toward
her. "It's a test," he said. "The Inquisitors are the
Lord Ruler's most holy priests. I'll do as commanded, and the Lord
Ruler will protect my men and this city. Then you will see."
Vin gritted her
teeth. Then, she turned and forced herself to walk up beside Marsh.
She glanced out the window—and was surprised to see that
Elend's army was retreating away from Yomen's soldiers. Yomen's force
wasn't running with very much conviction. Obviously, they were
content to let their superior enemy run away before them. The sun was
finally setting.
Marsh did not seem
to find Elend's retreat amusing. That was enough to make Vin
smile—which made Marsh grab her again.
"You think you
have won?" Marsh asked, leaning down, his uneven spikeheads
hanging just before Vin's face.
Vin reached for his
sash. Just a little farther. . . .
"You claim to
have been playing with me, child," Ruin said, stepping up next
to her. "But you are the one who has been played. The koloss who
serve you, they get their strength from my power. You think
that I would let you control them if it weren't for my eventual
gain?"
Vin felt a moment
of chill.
Oh, no. . . .
Elend felt a
terrible ripping sensation. It was like a part of his
innards had been suddenly, and forcibly, pulled away from him. He
gasped, releasing his Steelpush. He fell through the ash-filled sky,
and landed unevenly on a rock shelf outside of Fadrex City.
He gasped,
breathing in and out, trembling.
What in the
hell was that? he thought, standing up, holding his thumping
head.
And then he
realized it. He couldn't feel the koloss anymore. In the distance,
the massive blue creatures stopped running away. And then, to Elend's
horror, he watched them turn around.
They began to
charge his men.
Marsh held her.
"Hemalurgy is his power, Vin!" he said. "The
Lord Ruler used it unwittingly! The fool! Each time he built an
Inquisitor or a koloss, he made another servant for his enemy! Ruin
waited patiently, knowing that when he finally broke free, he'd have
an entire army waiting for him!"
Yomen was at
another window. He gasped quietly, watching. "You did deliver my
men!" the obligator said. "The koloss have turned to attack
their own army!"
"They'll come
after your men next, Yomen," Vin said, dizzily. "Then
they'll destroy your city."
"It is
ending," Ruin whispered. "Everything needs to fit into
place. Where is the atium? It's the last piece."
Marsh shook her.
She finally managed to reach his sash—and slipped her fingers
into it. Fingers trained by her brother, and by a lifetime on the
street.
The fingers of a
thief.
"You can't
fool me, Vin," Ruin said. "I am God."
Marsh raised one
hand—releasing her arm—then raised a fist as if to hit
her. He moved with power, pewter obviously burning inside of him. He
was an Allomancer, like all Inquisitors. Which meant he tended to
keep metals on his person. Vin flipped her hand up and downed the
vial of metals she'd stolen from his sash.
Marsh froze, and
Ruin fell silent.
Vin smiled.
Pewter flared in
her stomach, restoring her to life. Marsh moved to complete his slap,
but she pulled out of the way, then yanked him off balance by pulling
her other arm—which he still held—to the side. He hung
on, barely, but when he turned to face Vin, he found her holding her
earring in one hand.
And she
duralumin-Pushed it directly into his forehead. It was a tiny bit of
metal, but it threw up a drop of blood as it hit, ripping through his
head and passing out the other side.
Marsh dropped, and
Vin was thrown backward by her own Push. She crashed into the wall,
causing soldiers to scatter and yell, raising weapons. Yomen turned
toward her, surprised.
"Yomen!"
she said. "Bring your men back! Fortify the city!" Ruin had
disappeared in the chaos of her escape. Perhaps he was out overseeing
the control of the koloss.
Yomen seemed
indecisive. "I . . . No. I will not lose faith. I must be
strong."
Vin gritted her
teeth, climbing to her feet. Nearly as frustrating as Elend is at
times, she thought, scrambling over to Marsh's body. She reached
into his sash, pulling out the second—and final—vial he
had stored there. She downed this, restoring the metals she'd lost to
duralumin.
Then, she hopped up
on the windowsill. Mist puffed around her—the sun was still up,
but the mists were arriving earlier and earlier. Outside, she could
see Elend's forces beleaguered by rampaging koloss on one side,
Yomen's soldiers not attacking—yet blocking retreat—on
the other. She moved to jump out and join the fight, and then she
noticed something.
A small group of
koloss. A thousand in number, small enough to apparently have been
ignored by both Elend's forces and Yomen's. Even Ruin appeared to
have paid them no heed, for they simply stood in the ash, partially
buried, like a collection of quiet stones.
Vin's koloss. The
ones that Elend had given her, Human at their lead. With a devious
smile, she ordered them forward.
To attack Yomen's
men.
"I'm telling
you, Yomen," she said, hopping off of the windowsill and back
into the room. "Those koloss don't care which side the humans
are on—they'll kill anyone. The Inquisitors have gone mad, now
that the Lord Ruler is dead. Didn't you pay any attention to what
this one said?"
Yomen looked
thoughtful.
"He even
admitted that the Lord Ruler was dead, Yomen," Vin said with
exasperation. "Your faith is commendable. But sometimes, you
just have to know when to give up and move on!"
One of the soldier
captains yelled something, and Yomen spun back toward the window. He
cursed.
Immediately, Vin
felt something. Something Pulling on her koloss. She cried
out as they were yanked away from her, but the damage had been done.
Yomen looked troubled. He'd seen the koloss attack his soldiers. He
looked into Vin's eyes, silent for a moment. "Retreat into the
city!" he finally yelled, turning to his messengers. "And
order the men to allow Venture's soldiers refuge inside as well!"
Vin sighed in
relief. And then, something grabbed her leg. She looked down with
shock as Marsh climbed to his knees. She had sliced through his brain
itself, but the amazing Inquisitor healing powers seemed to be able
to deal even with that.
"Fool,"
Marsh said, standing. "Even if Yomen turns against me, I can
kill him, and his soldiers will follow me. He's given them a belief
in the Lord Ruler, and I hold that belief by right of inheritance."
Vin took a deep
breath, then hit Marsh with a duralumin-Soothing. If it worked on
koloss and kandra, why not Inquisitors?
Marsh stumbled.
Vin's Push lasted a brief moment, but during it she felt
something. A wall, like she'd felt the first time she'd tried to
control TenSoon or the first time she'd taken control of a group of
koloss.
She Pushed,
Pushed with everything she had. In a burst of power, she came close
to seizing control of Marsh's body, but not close enough. The wall
within his mind was too strong, and she only had one vial's worth of
metal to use. The wall shoved her back. She cried out in frustration.
Marsh reached out,
growling, and grabbed her by the neck. She gasped, eyes widening as
Marsh began to grow in size. Getting stronger, like . . .
A Feruchemist,
she realized. I'm in serious trouble.
People in the room
were yelling, but she couldn't hear them. Marsh's hand—now
large and beefy—gripped her throat, strangling her. Only flared
pewter was keeping her alive. She flashed back to the day, many years
ago, when she'd been held by another Inquisitor. Standing in the Lord
Ruler's throne room.
On that day, Marsh
himself had saved her life. It seemed a twisted irony that she would
struggle now, being strangled by him.
Not. Yet.
The mists began to
swirl around her.
Marsh started,
though he continued to hold her.
Vin drew upon the
mists.
It happened again.
She didn't know how, or why, but it just happened. She
breathed the mists into her body, as she had on that day so long ago
when she'd killed the Lord Ruler. She somehow pulled them into her
and used them to fuel her body with an incredible Allomantic surge of
power.
And, with that
power, she Pushed on Marsh's emotions.
The wall inside of
him cracked, then burst. For a moment, Vin felt a sense of vertigo.
She saw things through Marsh's eyes—indeed, she felt like she
understood him. His love of destruction, and his hatred of
himself. And through him, she caught a brief glimpse of something. A
hateful, destructive thing that hid behind a mask of civility.
Ruin was not
the same thing as the mists.
Marsh cried out,
dropping her. Her strange burst of power dissipated, but it didn't
matter, for Marsh fled out the window and Pushed himself away through
the mists. Vin picked herself up, coughing.
I did it. I
drew upon the mists again. But why now? Why, after all the trying,
did it happen now?
There was no time
to consider it at the moment—not with the koloss attacking. She
turned to the baffled Yomen. "Continue to retreat into the
city!" she said. "I'm going out to help."
Elend fought
desperately, cutting down koloss after koloss. It was difficult,
dangerous work, even for him. These koloss couldn't be controlled—no
matter how he Pushed or Pulled on their emotions, he couldn't bring
even one of them under his power.
That only left
fighting. And, his men weren't prepared for battle—he'd forced
them to abandon camp too quickly.
A koloss swung, its
sword whooshing dangerously close to Elend's head. He cursed,
dropping a coin and Pushing himself backward through the air, over
his fighting men and back into camp. They'd managed to retreat back
to the positioning of their original fortification, which meant that
they had a small hill for defense and didn't have to fight in ash. A
group of his Coinshots—he only had ten—stood firing wave
after wave of coins into the main bulk of the koloss, and archers
threw similar volleys. The main line of soldiers was supported by
Lurchers from behind, who would Pull on koloss weapons and throw them
off balance, giving the regular men extra openings. Thugs ran around
the perimeter in groups of two or three, shoring up weak spots and
acting as reserves.
Even with all of
that, they were in serious trouble. Elend's army couldn't stand
against so many koloss any more easily than Fadrex could have. Elend
landed in the middle of the half-disassembled camp, breathing
heavily, covered in koloss blood. Men yelled as they fought a short
distance away, holding the camp perimeter with the help of Elend's
Allomancers. The bulk of the koloss army was still bunched around the
northern section of camp, but Elend couldn't pull his men back any
farther toward Fadrex without exposing them to Yomen's archers.
Elend tried to
catch his breath as a servant rushed up with a cup of water for him.
Cett sat a short distance away, directing the battle tactics. Elend
tossed aside the empty cup and moved over to the general, who sat at
a small table. It held a map of the area, but hadn't been marked on.
The koloss were so close, the battle happening just yards away, that
it wasn't really necessary to keep an abstract battle map.
"Never did
like having those things in the army," Cett said as he downed a
cup of water himself. A servant moved over, leading a surgeon, who
pulled out a bandage to begin working on Elend's arm—which, up
until that moment, he hadn't noticed was bleeding.
"Well,"
Cett noted, "at least we'll die in battle, rather than of
starvation!"
Elend snorted,
picking up his sword again. The sky was nearly dark. They didn't have
much time before—
A figure landed on
the table in front of Cett. "Elend!" Vin said. "Retreat
to the city. Yomen will let you in."
Elend started.
"Vin!" Then, he smiled. "What took you so long?"
"I got delayed
by an Inquisitor and a dark god," she said. "Now, hustle.
I'll go see if I can distract some of those koloss."

Inquisitors had
little chance of resisting Ruin. They had more spikes than any of his
other Hemalurgic creations, and that put them completely under his
domination.
Yes, it would
have taken a man of supreme will to resist Ruin even slightly while
bearing the spikes of an Inquisitor.





66
SAZED TRIED
NOT TO THINK about how dark the ash was in the sky, or how
terrible the land looked.
I've been such
a fool, he thought, riding in the saddle. Of all the times
that the world needed something to believe in, this is it. And I
wasn't there to give it to them.
He hurt from so
much riding, yet he clung to the saddle, still somewhat amazed at the
creature who ran beneath him. When Sazed had first decided to go with
TenSoon south, he had despaired at making the trip. Ash fell like the
snows of a blizzard, and it had piled terribly high in most places.
Sazed had known travel would be difficult, and he'd feared slowing
TenSoon, who could obviously travel far more quickly as a wolfhound.
TenSoon considered
this concern, then had ordered a horse and a large hog to be brought
to him. TenSoon first ingested the hog to give himself extra mass,
then molded his gel-like flesh around the horse to digest it as well.
Within an hour, he'd formed his body into a replica of the horse—but
one with enhanced muscles and weight, creating the enormous,
extra-strong marvel which Sazed now rode.
They'd been running
nonstop since then. Fortunately, Sazed had some wakefulness he'd
stored in a metalmind a year ago, after the siege of Luthadel. He
used this to keep himself from falling asleep. It still amazed him
that TenSoon could enhance a horse's body so well. It moved with ease
through the thick ash, where a real horse—and certainly a
human—would have balked at the difficulty. Another thing
I've been a fool about. These last few days, I could have been
interrogating TenSoon about his powers. How much more is there that I
don't know?
Despite his shame,
however, Sazed felt something of peace within himself. If he'd
continued to teach about religions after he'd stopped believing in
them, then he would have been a true hypocrite. Tindwyl had believed
in giving people hope, even if one had to tell them lies to do so.
That's the credit she had given to religion: lies that made people
feel better.
Sazed couldn't have
acted the same way—at least, he couldn't have done so and
remained the person he wanted to be. However, he now had hope. The
Terris religion was the one that had taught about the Hero of Ages in
the first place. If any contained the truth, it would be this one.
Sazed needed to interrogate the First Generation of kandra and
discover what they knew.
Though, if I do
find the truth, what will I do with it?
The trees they
passed were stripped of leaves. The landscape was covered in a good
four feet of ash. "How can you keep going like this?" Sazed
asked as the kandra galloped over a hilltop, shoving aside ash and
ignoring obstructions.
"My people are
created from mistwraiths," TenSoon explained, not even sounding
winded. "The Lord Ruler turned the Feruchemists into
mistwraiths, and they began to breed true as a species. You add a
Blessing to a mistwraith, and they become awakened, turning into a
kandra. One such as I, created centuries after the Ascension, was
born as a mistwraith but became awakened when I received my
Blessing."
". . .
Blessing?" Sazed asked.
"Two small
metal spikes, Keeper," TenSoon said. "We are created like
Inquisitors, or like koloss. However, we are more subtle creations
than either of those. We were made third and last, as the Lord
Ruler's power waned."
Sazed frowned,
leaning low as the horse ran beneath some skeletal tree branches.
"What is
different about you?"
"We have more
independence of will than the other two," TenSoon said. "We
only have two spikes in us, while the others have more. An Allomancer
can still take control of us, but free we remain more independent of
mind than koloss or Inquisitors, who are both affected by Ruin's
impulses even when he isn't directly controlling them. Did you never
wonder why both of them are driven so powerfully to kill?"
"That doesn't
explain how you can carry me, all our baggage, and still run through
this ash."
"The metal
spikes we carry grant us things," TenSoon said. "Much as
Feruchemy gives you strength, or Allomancy gives Vin strength, my
Blessing gives me strength. It will never run out, but it isn't as
spectacular as the bursts your people can create. Still, my
Blessing—mixed with my ability to craft my body as I
wish—allows me a high level of endurance."
Sazed fell silent.
They continued to gallop.
"There isn't
much time left," TenSoon noted.
"I can see
that," Sazed said. "It makes me wonder what we can do."
"This is the
only time in which we could succeed," TenSoon said. "We
must be poised, ready to strike. Ready to aid the Hero of Ages when
she comes."
"Comes?"
"She will lead
an army of Allomancers to the Homeland," TenSoon said, "and
there will save all of us—kandra, human, koloss, and
Inquisitor."
An army of
Allomancers? "Then . . . what am I to do?"
"You must
convince the kandra how dire the situation is," TenSoon
explained, slowing to a stop in the ash. "For there is . . .
something they must be prepared to do. Something very difficult, yet
necessary. My people will resist it, but perhaps you can show them
the way."
Sazed nodded, then
climbed off of the kandra to stretch his legs.
"Do you
recognize this location?" TenSoon asked, turning to look at him
with a horse's head.
"I do not,"
Sazed said. "With the ash . . . well, I haven't really been able
to follow our path for days."
"Over that
ridge, you will find the place where the Terris people have set up
their refugee camp."
Sazed turned with
surprise. "The Pits of Hathsin?"
TenSoon nodded. "We
call it the Homeland."
"The Pits?"
Sazed asked with shock. "But . . ."
"Well, not the
Pits themselves," TenSoon said. "You know that this entire
area has cave complexes beneath it?"
Sazed nodded. The
place where Kelsier had trained his original army of skaa soldiers
was just a short trip to the north.
"Well, one of
those cave complexes is the kandra Homeland. It abuts the Pits of
Hathsin—in fact, several of the kandra passages run into the
Pits, and had to be kept closed off, lest workers in the Pits find
their way into the Homeland."
"Does your
Homeland grow atium?" Sazed asked.
"Grow it? No,
it does not. That is, I suppose, what separates the Homeland from the
Pits of Hathsin. Either way, the entrance to my people's caverns is
right there."
Sazed turned with a
start. "Where?"
"That
depression in the ash," TenSoon said, nodding his large head
toward it. "Good luck, Keeper. I have my own duties to attend
to."
Sazed nodded,
feeling shocked that they had traveled so far so quickly, and untied
his pack from the kandra's back. He left the bag containing
bones—those of the wolfhound, and another set that looked
human. Probably a body TenSoon carried to use should he need it.
The enormous horse
turned to go.
"Wait!"
Sazed said, raising a hand.
TenSoon looked
back.
"Good luck,"
Sazed said. "May . . . our god preserve you."
TenSoon smiled with
a strange equine expression, then took off, galloping through the
ash.
Sazed turned to the
depression in the ground. Then, he hefted his pack—filled with
metalminds and a solitary tome—and walked forward. Even moving
that short distance in the ash was difficult. He reached the
depression and—taking a breath—began to dig his way into
the ash.
He didn't get far
before he slid down into a tunnel. It didn't open straight down,
fortunately, and he didn't fall far. The cavern around him came up at
an incline, opening to the outside world in a hole that was half pit,
half cave. Sazed stood up in the cavern, then reached into his pack
and pulled out a tinmind. With this, he tapped eyesight, improving
his vision as he walked into the darkness.
A tinmind didn't
work as well as an Allomancer's tin—or, rather, it didn't work
in the same way. It could allow one to see very great distances, but
it was of far less help in poor illumination. Soon, even with his
tinmind, Sazed was walking in darkness, feeling his way along the
tunnel.
And then, he saw
light.
"Halt!" a
voice called. "Who returns from Contract?"
Sazed continued
forward. A part of him was frightened, but another part was just
curious. He knew a very important fact.
Kandra could not
kill humans.
Sazed stepped up to
the light, which turned out to be a melon-sized rock atop a pole, its
porous material coated with some kind of glowing fungus. A pair of
kandra blocked his path. They were easily identifiable as such since
they wore no clothing and their skins were translucent. They appeared
to have bones carved from rock.
Fascinating!
Sazed thought. They make their own bones. I really do have a
new culture to explore. A whole new society—art, religion,
mores, gender interactions. . . .
The prospect was so
exciting that, for a moment, even the end of the world seemed trivial
by comparison. He had to remind himself to focus. He needed to
investigate their religion first. Other things were secondary.
"Kandra, who
are you? Which bones do you wear?"
"You are going
to be surprised, I think," Sazed said as gently as he could.
"For, I am no kandra. My name is Sazed, Keeper of Terris, and I
have been sent to speak with the First Generation."
Both kandra guards
started.
"You don't
have to let me pass," Sazed said. "Of course, if you don't
take me into your Homeland, then I'll have to leave and tell everyone
on the outside where it is. . . ."
The guards turned
to each other. "Come with us," one of them finally said.

Koloss also had
little chance of breaking free. Four spikes, and their diminished
mental capacity, left them fairly easy to dominate. Only in the
throes of a blood frenzy did they have any form of autonomy.
Four spikes
also made them easier for Allomancers to control. In our time, it
required a duralumin Push to take control of a kandra. Koloss,
however, could be taken by a determined regular Push, particularly
when they were frenzied.





67
ELEND AND
VIN STOOD ATOP the Fadrex City fortifications. The rock
ledge had once held the bonfires they'd watched in the night sky—she
could see the blackened scar from one of them just to her left.
It felt good to be
held by Elend again. His warmth was a comfort, particularly when
looking out of the city, over the field that Elend's army had once
occupied. The koloss army was growing. It stood silently in the
blizzard-like ash, thousands strong. More and more of the creatures
were arriving each day, amassing to an overwhelming force.
"Why don't
they just attack?" Yomen asked with annoyance. He was the only
other one who stood on the overlook; Ham and Cett were down below,
seeing to the army's preparation. They'd need to be ready to defend
the moment that the koloss assaulted the city.
"He wants us
to know just how soundly he's going to beat us," Vin said. Plus,
she added in her mind, he's waiting. Waiting on that last bit of
information.
Where is the
atium?
She'd fooled Ruin.
She'd proven to herself that it could be done. Yet, she was still
frustrated. She felt like she'd spent the last few years of her life
reacting to every wiggle of Ruin's fingers. Each time she thought
herself clever, wise, or self-sacrificing, she discovered that she'd
simply been doing his will the entire time. It made her angry.
But what could she
do?
I have to make
Ruin play his hand , she thought. Make him act ,
expose himself.
For a brief moment,
back in Yomen's throne room, she had felt something amazing. With the
strange power she'd gained from the mists, she'd touched Ruin's own
mind—via Marsh—and seen something therein.
Fear. She
remembered it, distinct and pure. At that moment, Ruin had been
afraid of her. That's why Marsh had fled.
Somehow, she'd
taken the power of the mists into her, then used them to perform
Allomancy of surpassing might. She'd done it before, when fighting
the Lord Ruler in his palace. Why could she only draw on that power
at random, unpredictable times? She'd wanted to use it against Zane,
but had failed. She'd tried a dozen times during the last few days,
just as she'd tried during the days following the Lord Ruler's death.
She'd never been able to access even a hint of that power.
It struck like a
thunderclap.
A massive,
overpowering quake rolled across the land. The rock ledges around
Fadrex broke, some of them tumbling to the ground. Vin remained on
her feet, but only with the help of pewter, and she barely snatched
Yomen by the front of his obligator robes as he careened and almost
fell from their ledge. Elend grabbed her arm, reinforcing her as the
sudden quake shook the land. Inside the city, several buildings fell.
Then, all went
still. Vin breathed heavily, forehead slicked with sweat, Yomen's
robes clutched in her grip. She glanced at Elend.
"That one was
far worse than the previous ones," he said, cursing quietly to
himself.
"We're
doomed," Yomen said softly, forcing himself to his feet. "If
the things you say are true, then not only is the Lord Ruler dead,
but the thing he spent his life fighting has now come to destroy the
world."
"We've
survived this long," Elend said firmly. "We'll make it yet.
Earthquakes may hurt us, but they hurt the koloss too—look, and
you'll see that some of them were crushed by toppling rocks. If
things get rough up here, we can retreat inside the cavern."
"And will it
survive quakes like that one?" Yomen asked.
"Better than
the buildings up here will. None of this was built for
earthquakes—but if I know the Lord Ruler, he anticipated the
quakes, and picked caverns that were solid and capable of
withstanding them."
Yomen seemed to
take little comfort in the words, but Vin smiled. Not because of what
Elend said, but because of how he said it. Something about him had
changed. He seemed confident in a way he'd never been before. He had
some of the same idealistic air he'd expressed when he'd been a youth
at court—yet he also had the hardness of the man who'd led his
people in war.
He'd finally found
the balance. And, oddly enough, it had come from deciding to retreat.
"He does have
a point, however, Vin," Elend said in a softer tone. "We
need to figure out our next step. Ruin obviously intended to defeat
us here, but he has been pushed back for a time, at least. What now?"
We have to
trick him, she thought. Perhaps . . . use the same strategy Yomen
used on me?
She paused,
considering the idea. She reached up, fingering her earring. It had
been mangled after its trip through Marsh's head, of course, but it
had been a simple matter to have a smith bend it back into shape.
The first time
she'd met with Yomen, he'd given her back the earring. It had seemed
like a strange move, giving metal to an Allomancer. Yet, in a
controlled environment, it had been very clever. He'd been able to
test and see if she had any hidden metals—all the while
reserving the fact that he could burn atium and protect himself.
Later, he'd been
able to get her to reveal her hand, to attack and show him what she
was planning, so that he could defuse it in a situation where he was
in power. Could she do the same to Ruin?
That thought mixed
with another one. Both times when the mists had helped her, they had
come in a moment of pure desperation. It was as if they reacted to
her need. So, was there a way to put herself in a situation where her
need was even greater than before? It was a thin hope, but—mixed
with her desire to force Ruin's hand—it formed a plan in her
head.
Put herself in
danger. Make Ruin bring his Inquisitors, putting Vin in a situation
where the mists had to help her. If that didn't work, maybe
she could get Ruin to play his hand or spring any hidden traps he had
waiting for her.
It was incredibly
risky, but she could feel that she didn't have much time. Ruin would
win soon—very soon—unless she did something.
And, this was all she could think of to do. But, how could she make
it happen without explaining it to Elend? She couldn't speak of the
plan, lest she reveal to Ruin what she was doing.
She looked up at
Elend, a man she seemed to know better than herself. He hadn't needed
to tell her that he'd reconciled the two halves of himself, she'd
simply been able to tell it from looking at him. With a person like
that, did she even really need to speak her plans? Perhaps . . .
"Elend," she said, "I think there's only one way to
save this city."
"And that is?"
he said slowly.
"I have to go
get it."
Elend frowned, then
opened his mouth. She looked into his eyes, hoping. He paused.
"The . . .
atium?" he guessed.
Vin smiled. "Yes.
Ruin knows that we have it. He'll find it even if we don't use it.
But, if we bring it here, at least we can fight."
"It would be
safer here anyway," Elend said slowly, eyes confused, but
trusting her. "I'd rather have an army between those riches and
our enemies. Perhaps we could use it to bribe some local warlords to
help us."
It seemed a flimsy
ruse to her. And yet, she knew that was because she could see Elend's
confusion, could read his lies in his eyes. She understood him, as he
understood her. It was an understanding that required love.
And she suspected
that was something that Ruin would never be able to comprehend.
"I need to
leave, then," she said, embracing him tightly, closing her eyes.
"I know."
She held him close
for a few moments longer, feeling the ash fall around her, blow
against her skin and cheek. Feeling Elend's heart beat beneath her
ear. She leaned up and kissed him. Finally, she pulled back, then
checked her metals. She met his eyes, and he nodded, so she jumped
down into the city to gather some horseshoes.
A few moments
later, she was shooting through the ashy air toward Luthadel, a
maelstrom of metal around her. Elend stood silently behind, on the
rock ledge, watching her go.
Now, she
thought to Ruin, who she knew was watching her carefully, even though
he hadn't revealed himself since she'd drawn upon the mists. Let's
have a chase, you and I.

When the Lord
Ruler offered his plan to his Feruchemist friends—the plan to
change them into mistwraiths—he was making them speak on behalf
of all the land's Feruchemists. Though he changed his friends into
kandra to restore their minds and memories, the rest he left as
nonsentient mistwraiths. These bred more of their kind, living and
dying, becoming a race unto themselves. From these children of the
original mistwraiths, he made the next generations of kandra.
However, even
gods can make mistakes, I have learned. Rashek, the Lord Ruler,
thought to transform all of the living Feruchemists into mistwraiths.
However, he did not think of the genetic heritage left in the other
Terris people, whom he left alive. So it was that Feruchemists
continued being born, if only rarely.
This oversight
cost him much, but gained the world so much more.





68
SAZED
WALKED IN WONDER, led by his guards. He saw kandra after
kandra, each one with a more interesting body than the one before.
Some were tall and willowy, with bones made of white wood. Others
were stocky, with bones thicker than any human's. All stuck generally
to human body shapes, however.
They used to be
human, he reminded himself. Or, at least, their ancestors
were.
The caverns around
him felt old. The pathways were worn smooth, and while there were no
real "buildings," he passed many smaller caverns, varied
drapery hanging in front of their openings. There was a sense of
exquisite craftsmanship to it all, from the carved poles that held
the fungus lights, to the very bones of the people around him. It
wasn't the detailed ornamentation of a nobleman's keep, for there
were no patterns, leaves, or knots carved into the stonework or
bones. Instead, things were polished smooth, carved with rounded
sides, or woven in broad lines and shapes.
The kandra seemed
afraid of him. It was a strange experience for Sazed. He had been
many things in his life: rebel, servant, friend, scholar. However,
never before had he found himself an object of fear. Kandra ducked
around corners, peeking at him. Others stood in shock, watching him
pass. Obviously, news of his arrival had spread quickly, otherwise
they would have just assumed him to be a kandra wearing human bones.
His guards led him
to a steel door set into a large cavern wall. One of them moved
inside, while the other guarded Sazed. Sazed noticed shards of metal
twinkling in the kandra's shoulders. They appeared to be spikes, one
in each shoulder.
Smaller than
Inquisitor spikes, Sazed thought. But still very effective.
Interesting.
"What would
you do if I were to run?" Sazed asked.
The kandra started.
"Um . . ."
"Can I assume
from your hesitance that you are still forbidden to harm, or at least
kill, a human?" Sazed asked.
"We follow the
First Contract."
"Ah,"
Sazed said. "Very interesting. And, with whom did you make the
First Contract?"
"The Father."
"The Lord
Ruler?" Sazed asked.
The kandra nodded.
"He is,
unfortunately and truly, dead. So, is your Contract no longer valid?"
"I don't
know," the kandra said, looking away.
So, Sazed
thought, not all of them are as forceful of personality as TenSoon.
Even when he was playing the part of a simple wolfhound, I found him
to be intense.
The other soldier
returned. "Come with me," he said.
They led Sazed
through the open metal doors. The room beyond had a large metal
pedestal a few feet high. The guards did not step on it, but led
Sazed around it toward a place before a group of stone lecterns. Many
of the lecterns were empty, though kandra with twinkling bones stood
behind two of them. These creatures were tall—or, at least,
they used tall bones—and very fine-featured.
Aristocrats,
Sazed thought. He had found that class of people very easy to
identify, no matter what the culture or—apparently—species.
Sazed's guards
gestured for him to stand before the lecterns. Sazed ignored the
gestures, walking in a circle around the room. As he had expected,
his guards didn't know what to do—they followed, but refrained
from putting their hands on him.
"There is
metal plating surrounding the entire chamber," Sazed noted. "Is
it ornamental, or does it serve a function?"
"We will be
asking the questions here, Terrisman!" said one of the
aristocratic kandra.
Sazed paused,
turning. "No," he said. "No, you will not. I am Sazed,
Keeper of Terris. However, among your people, I have another name.
Holy Announcer."
The other kandra
leader snorted. "What does an outsider know of such things?"
"An outsider?"
Sazed asked. "You should better learn your own doctrine, I
think." He began to walk forward. "I am Terris, as are you.
Yes, I know your origins. I know how you were created—and I
know the heritage you bring with you."
He stopped before
their lecterns. "I announce to you that I have discovered the
Hero. I have lived with her, worked with her, and watched her. I
handed her the very spear she used to slay the Lord Ruler. I have
seen her take command of kings, watched her overcome armies of both
men and koloss. I have come to announce this to you, so that you may
prepare yourselves."
He paused, eyeing
them. "For the end is here," he added.
The two kandra
stood quietly for a few moments. "Go get the others," one
finally said, his voice shaking.
Sazed smiled. As
one of the guards ran off, Sazed turned to face down the second
soldier. "I shall require a table and chair, please. Also,
something with which to write."
A few minutes
later, all was ready. His kandra attendants had swelled from four to
over twenty—twelve of them being the aristocratic ones with the
twinkling bones. Some attendants had set up a small table for Sazed,
and he seated himself as the kandra nobles spoke together in anxious
whispers.
Carefully, Sazed
placed his pack on the table and began to remove his metal-minds.
Small rings, smaller earrings and studs, and large bracers soon lined
the table. He pushed up his sleeves, then clasped on his
copperminds—two large bracers on the upper arms, then two
bracers on the forearms. Finally, he removed his tome from the pack
and set it on the table. Some kandra approached with thin plates of
metal. Sazed watched curiously as they arranged them for him, along
with what appeared to be a steel pen, capable of making indentations
in the soft writing metal. The kandra servants bowed and withdrew.
Excellent,
Sazed thought, picking up the metal pen and clearing his throat.
The kandra leaders turned toward him.
"I assume,"
Sazed said, "that you are the First Generation?"
"We are the
Second Generation, Terrisman," one of the kandra said.
"Well, I
apologize for taking your time, then. Where can I find your
superiors?"
The lead kandra
snorted. "Do not think you have us quelled just because you were
able to draw us together. I see no reason for you to speak with the
First Generation, even if you can blaspheme quite accurately."
Sazed raised an
eyebrow. "Blaspheme?"
"You are not
the Announcer," the kandra said. "This is not the end."
"Have you seen
the ash up above?" Sazed said. "Or, has it stopped up the
entrances to this cavern complex so soundly that nobody can escape to
see that the world is falling apart?"
"We have lived
a very long time, Terrisman," one of the other kandra said. "We
have seen periods where the ash fell more copiously than others."
"Oh?"
Sazed asked. "And you have, perhaps, seen the Lord Ruler die
before as well?"
Some of the kandra
looked uncomfortable at this, though the one at the lead shook his
head. "Did TenSoon send you?"
"He did,"
Sazed admitted.
"You can make
no arguments other than those he has already made," the kandra
said. "Why would he think that you—an outsider—could
persuade us, when he could not?"
"Perhaps
because he understood something about me," Sazed said, tapping
his book with his pen. "Are you aware of the ways of Keepers,
kandra?"
"My name is
KanPaar," the kandra said. "And yes, I understand what
Keepers do—or, at least, what they did, before the Father was
killed."
"Then,"
Sazed said, "perhaps you know that every Keeper has an area of
specialty. The intention was that when the Lord Ruler finally did
fall, we would already be divided into specialists who could teach
our knowledge to the people."
"Yes,"
KanPaar said.
"Well,"
Sazed said, rubbing fingers over his book. "My specialty was
religion. Do you know how many religions there were before the Lord
Ruler's Ascension?"
"I don't know.
Hundreds."
"We have
record of five hundred and sixty-three," Sazed said. "Though
that includes sects of the same religions. In a more strict count,
there were around three hundred."
"And?"
KanPaar asked.
"Do you know
how many of these survived until this day?" Sazed asked.
"None?"
"One,"
Sazed said, holding up a finger. "Yours. The Terris religion. Do
you think it a coincidence that the religion you follow not only
still exists, but also foretells this exact day?"
KanPaar snorted.
"You are saying nothing new. So my religion is real, while
others were lies. What does that explain?"
"That you
should listen, perhaps, to members of your faith who bring you
tidings." Sazed began to flip through his book. "At the
very least, I would think that you'd be interested in this book, as
it contains the collected information about the Hero of Ages that I
was able to discover. Since I knew little of the true Terris
religion, I had to get my information from secondhand accounts—from
tales and stories, and from texts written during the intermediate
time.
"Unfortunately,"
Sazed continued, "much of this text was changed by Ruin when he
was trying to persuade the Hero to visit the Well of Ascension and
set him free. Therefore, it is quite well corrupted and tainted by
his touch."
"And why would
I be interested?" KanPaar asked. "You just told me that
your information is corrupt and useless."
"Useless?"
Sazed asked. "No, not useless at all. Corrupt, yes. Changed by
Ruin. My friend, I have a tome here filled with Ruin's lies. You have
a mind filled with the original truths. Apart, we know very little.
However, if we were to compare—discovering precisely
which items Ruin changed—would it not tell us exactly what his
plan is? At the very least, it would tell us what he didn't want us
to focus on, I think."
The room fell
silent.
"Well,"
KanPaar finally said, "I—"
"That will be
enough, KanPaar," a voice said.
Sazed paused,
cocking his head. The voice hadn't come from any of those beside the
pedestals. Sazed glanced around the room, trying to discover who had
spoken.
"You may
leave, Seconds," another voice said.
One of the Seconds
gasped. "Leave? Leave you with this one, an outsider?"
"A
descendant," one of the voices said. "A Worldbringer. We
will hear him."
"Leave us,"
said another voice.
Sazed raised an
eyebrow, sitting as the Second Generationers—looking
rattled—left their lecterns and quietly made their way from the
room. A pair of guards pushed the doors shut, blocking the view of
those kandra who had been watching outside. Sazed was left alone in
the room with the phantoms who had spoken.
Sazed heard a
scraping sound. It echoed through the steel-lined chamber, and then a
door opened at the back of the room. From this came what he assumed
was the First Generation. They looked . . . old. Their kandra flesh
literally hung from their bodies, drooping, like translucent tree
moss dripping from bone branches. They were stooped, seeming older
than the other kandra he had seen, and they didn't walk so much as
shuffle.
They wore simple
robes, with no sleeves, but the garments still looked odd on the
creatures. In addition, beneath their translucent skin, he could see
that they had white, normal skeletons. "Human bones?" Sazed
asked as the elderly creatures made their way forward, walking with
canes.
"Our own
bones," one of them said, speaking with a tired near-whisper of
a voice. "We hadn't the skill or knowledge to form True Bodies
when this all began, and so took our original bones again when the
Lord Ruler gave them to us."
The First
Generation appeared to have only ten members. They arranged
themselves on the benches. And, out of respect, Sazed moved his table
so that he was seated before them, like a presenter before an
audience.
"Now," he
said, raising his metal scratching pen. "Let us begin—we
have much work to do."

The question
remains, where did the original prophecies about the Hero of Ages
come from? I now know that Ruin changed them, but did not fabricate
them. Who first taught that a Hero would come, one who would be an
emperor of all mankind, yet would be rejected by his own people? Who
first stated he would carry the future of the world on his arms, or
that he would repair that which had been sundered?
And who decided
to use the neutral pronoun, so that we wouldn't know if the Hero was
a woman or a man?





69
MARSH KNELT
IN A PILE OF ASH, hating himself and the world. The ash fell
without cease, drifting onto his back, covering him, and yet he did
not move.
He had been cast
aside, told to sit and wait. Like a tool forgotten in the yard,
slowly being covered in snow.
I was there ,
he thought. With Vin. Yet . . . I couldn't speak to her. Couldn't
tell her anything.
Worse . . . he
hadn't wanted to. During his entire conversation with her, his body
and mind had belonged to Ruin completely. Marsh had been helpless to
resist, hadn't been able to do anything that might have let Vin kill
him.
Except for a
moment. A moment near the end, when she'd almost taken control of
him. A moment when he'd seen something inside of his master—his
god, his self—that gave him hope.
For in that moment,
Ruin had feared her.
And then, Ruin had
forced Marsh to run, leaving behind his army of koloss—the army
that Marsh had been ordered to let Elend Venture steal, then bring to
Fadrex. The army that Ruin had eventually stolen back.
And now Marsh
waited in the ash.
What is the
point? he thought. His master wanted something . . . needed
something . . . and he feared Vin. Those two things gave Marsh hope,
but what could he do? Even in Ruin's moment of weakness, Marsh had
been unable to take control.
Marsh's plan—to
wait, keeping the rebellious sliver of himself secret until the right
moment, then pull out the spike in his back and kill himself—seemed
increasingly foolish. How could he hope to break free, even for that
long?
Stand.
The command came
wordlessly, but Marsh reacted instantly. And Ruin was back,
controlling his body. With effort, Marsh retained some small control
of his mind, though only because Ruin seemed distracted. Marsh
started dropping coins, Pushing off them, using and reusing them in
the same way Vin used horseshoes. Horseshoes—which had far more
metal—would have been better, for they would have let him Push
farther with each one. But, he made coins work.
He propelled
himself through the late-afternoon sky. The red air was unpleasantly
abrasive, so crowded with ash. Marsh watched it, trying to keep
himself from seeing beauty in the destruction without alerting Ruin
that he wasn't completely dominated.
It was difficult.
After some
time—after night had long since fallen—Ruin commanded
Marsh to the ground. He descended quickly, robes flapping, and landed
atop a short hill. The ash came up to his waist, and he was probably
standing on a few feet of packed ash underneath.
In the distance,
down the slope, a solitary figure pushed resolutely through the ash.
The man wore a pack and led an exhausted horse.
Who is this?
Marsh thought, looking closer. The man had the build of a
soldier, with a square face and balding head, his jaw bearing several
days' worth of beard. Whoever he was, he had an impressive
determination. Few people would brave the mists—yet this man
not only walked through them, but forged his way through ash that was
as high as his chest. The man's uniform was stained black, as was his
skin. Dark . . . ashen . . .
Beautiful.
Marsh launched
himself from the hilltop, hurling through the mist and ash on a Push
of steel. The man below must have heard him coming, for he spun,
reaching anxiously for the sword at his side.
Marsh landed atop
the horse's back. The creature cried out, rearing, and Marsh jumped,
placing one foot on the beast's face as he flipped over it and landed
in the ash. The soldier had worn a path straight ahead, and Marsh
felt as if he were looking down a tight, black corridor.
The man whipped his
sword free. The horse whinnied nervously, stamping in the ash.
Marsh smiled, and
pulled an obsidian axe from the sheath by his side. The soldier
backed away, trying to clear room in the ash for a fight. Marsh saw
the worry in the man's eyes, the dreadful anticipation.
The horse whinnied
again. Marsh spun and sheared off its front legs, causing it to
scream in pain. Behind, the soldier moved. And—surprisingly—instead
of running, he attacked.
The man rammed his
sword through Marsh's back. It hit a spike, veering to the side, but
still impaled him. Marsh turned, smiling, and tapped healing to keep
himself standing.
The man kept
moving, reaching up for Marsh's back, obviously intending to try and
pull free the back spike. Marsh burned pewter, however, and spun out
of the way, ripping away the soldier's weapon.
Should have let
him grab it . . . the free sliver said, struggling, yet useless.
Marsh swung for the
man's head, intending to take it off with a single sweep of the axe,
but the soldier rolled in the ash, whipping a dagger from his boot
and swiping in an attempt to hamstring Marsh. A clever move, which
would have left Marsh on the ground, healing power or not.
However, Marsh
tapped speed. He suddenly moved several times faster than a normal
person, and he easily dodged the slice, instead planting a kick in
the soldier's chest.
The man grunted as
his ribs cracked. He fell in the ash, rolling and coughing, blood on
his lips. He came to a stop, covered in ash. Weakly, he reached for
his pocket.
Another dagger?
Marsh thought. However, the man pulled out a folded sheet.
Metal?
Marsh had a sudden
and overpowering desire to grab that sheet of metal. The soldier
struggled to crumple the thin sheet, to destroy its contents, but
Marsh screamed and brought his axe down on the man's arm, shearing it
off. Marsh raised the axe again, and this time took off the man's
head.
He didn't stop,
however, the blood fury driving him to slam his axe into the corpse
over and over again. In the back of his head, he could feel Ruin
exulting in the death—yet, he could also sense frustration.
Ruin tried to pull him away from the killing, to make him grab that
slip of metal, but in the grip of the bloodlust, Marsh couldn't be
controlled. Just like koloss.
Couldn't be
controlled. . . . That's —
He froze, Ruin
taking control once again. Marsh shook his head, the man's blood
rolling down his face, dripping from his chin. He turned and glanced
at the dying horse, which screamed in the quiet night. Marsh stumbled
to his feet, then reached for the disembodied arm, pulling free the
sheet of metal the soldier had tried to destroy with his dying
strength.
Read it!
The words were
distinct in Marsh's mind. Rarely did Ruin bother to address him—it
just used him like a puppet.
Read it aloud!
Marsh frowned,
slowly unfolding the letter, trying to give himself time to think.
Why would Ruin need him to read it? Unless . . . Ruin couldn't read?
But, that didn't make sense. The creature had been able to change the
words in books.
It had to be able
to read. Then, was it the metal that stopped Ruin?
He had the flap of
metal unfolded. There were indeed words scratched into its inside
surface. Marsh tried to resist reading the words. In fact, he longed
to grab his axe from where it had fallen dripping blood in the ash,
then use it to kill himself. But, he couldn't manage. He didn't even
have enough freedom to drop the letter. Ruin pushed and pulled,
manipulating Marsh's emotions, eventually getting him so that . . .
Yes. Why should he
bother disagreeing? Why argue with his god, his lord, his self? Marsh
held the sheet up, flaring his tin to get a better look at its
contents in the darkness.
" 'Vin,' "
he read. " 'My mind is clouded. A part of me wonders what is
real anymore. Yet, one thing seems to press on me again and again. I
must tell you something. I don't know if it will matter, but I must
say it nonetheless.
" 'The thing
we fight is real. I have seen it. It tried to destroy me, and it
tried to destroy the people of Urteau. It got control of me through a
method I wasn't expecting. Metal. A little sliver of metal piercing
my body. With that, it was able to twist my thoughts. It couldn't
take complete control of me, like you control the koloss, but it did
something similar, I think. Perhaps the piece of metal wasn't big
enough. I don't know.
" 'Either way,
it appeared to me, taking the form of Kelsier. It did the same thing
to the king here in Urteau. It is clever. It is subtle.
" 'Be careful,
Vin. Don't trust anyone pierced by metal! Even the smallest bit can
taint a man.
" 'Spook.' "
Marsh, again
completely controlled by Ruin, crumpled the metal up until its
scratchings were unreadable. Then, he tossed it into the ash and used
it as an anchor to Push himself into the air. Toward Luthadel.
He left the corpses
of horse, man, and message to lie dead in the ash, slowly being
buried.
Like forgotten
tools.

Quellion
actually placed his spike himself, as I understand it. The man was
never entirely stable. His fervor for following Kelsier and killing
the nobility was enhanced by Ruin, but Quellion had already had the
impulses. His passionate paranoia bordered on insanity at times, and
Ruin was able to prod him into placing that crucial spike.
Quellion's
spike was bronze, and he made it from one of the first Allomancers he
captured. That spike made him a Seeker, which was one of the ways he
was able to find and blackmail so many Allomancers during his time as
king of Urteau.
The point,
however, is that people with unstable personalities were more
susceptible to Ruin's influence, even if they didn't have a spike in
them. That, indeed, is likely how Zane got his spike.





70
"I
STILL DON'T SEE what good this does," Yomen said,
walking beside Elend as they passed Fadrex's gate.
Elend ignored the
comment, waving a greeting to a group of soldiers. He stopped beside
another group—not his, but Yomen's—and inspected their
weapons. He gave them a few words of encouragement, then moved on.
Yomen watched quietly, walking at Elend's side as an equal, not a
captured king.
The two had an
uneasy truce, but the field of koloss outside was more than enough of
a motivation to keep them working together. Elend had the larger army
of the two, but not by much—and they were growing increasingly
outnumbered as more and more koloss arrived.
"We should be
working on the sanitation problem," Yomen continued once they
were out of the men's earshot. "An army exists on two
principles: health and food. Provide those two things, and you will
be victorious."
Elend smiled,
recognizing the reference. Trentison's Supplying in Scale. A
few years earlier, he would have agreed with Yomen, and the two would
probably have spent the afternoon discussing the philosophy of
leadership in Yomen's palace. However, Elend had learned things in
the last few years that he simply hadn't been able to get from his
studies.
Unfortunately, that
meant he really couldn't explain them to Yomen—particularly not
in the time they had. So, instead, he nodded down the street. "We
can move on to the infirmary now, if you wish, Lord Yomen."
Yomen nodded, and
the two turned toward another section of the city. The obligator had
a no-nonsense approach to just about everything. Problems should be
dealt with quickly and directly. He had a good mind, despite his
fondness for making snap judgments.
As they walked,
Elend was careful to keep an eye out for soldiers—on duty or
off—in the streets. He nodded to their salutes, met their eyes.
Many were working to repair the damages caused by the increasingly
powerful earthquakes. Perhaps it was just in Elend's mind, but it
seemed that the soldiers walked a little taller after he passed.
Yomen frowned
slightly as he watched Elend do this. The obligator still wore the
robes of his station, despite the little bead of atium at his brow
that he used to mark his kingship. The tattoos on the man's forehead
almost seemed to curl toward the bead, as if they had been designed
with it in mind.
"You don't
know much about leading soldiers, do you, Yomen?" Elend asked.
The obligator
raised an eyebrow. "I know more than you ever will about
tactics, supply lines, and the running of armies between distinct
points."
"Oh?"
Elend said lightly. "So, you've read Bennitson's Armies in
Motion, have you?" The "distinct points" line was
a dead giveaway.
Yomen's frown
deepened.
"One thing
that we scholars tend to forget about, Yomen, is the impact emotion
can have on a battle. It isn't just about food, shoes, and clean
water, necessary as those are. It's about hope, courage, and the will
to live. Soldiers need to know that their leader will be in the
fight—if not killing enemies, then directing things personally
from behind the lines. They can't think of him as an abstract force
up on a tower somewhere, watching out a window and pondering the
depths of the universe."
Yomen fell silent
as they walked through streets that, despite being cleaned of ash,
had a forlorn cast to them. Most of the people had retreated to the
back portions of the city, where the koloss would go last, if they
broke through. They were camping outside, since buildings were unsafe
in the quakes.
"You are an .
. . interesting man, Elend Venture," Yomen finally said.
"I'm a
bastard," Elend said.
Yomen raised an
eyebrow.
"In
composition, not in temperament or by birth," Elend said with a
smile. "I'm an amalgamation of what I've needed to be. Part
scholar, part rebel, part nobleman, part Mistborn, and part soldier.
Sometimes, I don't even know myself. I had a devil of a time getting
all those pieces to work together. And, just when I'm starting to get
it figured out, the world up and ends on me. Ah, here we are."
Yomen's infirmary
was a converted Ministry building—which, in Elend's opinion,
showed that Yomen was willing to be flexible. His religious buildings
weren't so sacred to him that he couldn't acknowledge that they were
the best facilities for taking care of the sick and wounded. Inside,
they found physicians tending those who had survived the initial
clash with the koloss. Yomen bustled off to speak with the infirmary
bureaucrats—apparently, he was worried about the number of
infections that the men had suffered. Elend walked over to the
section with the most serious cases, and began visiting them,
offering encouragement.
It was tough work,
looking at the soldiers who had suffered because of his foolishness.
How could he have missed seeing that Ruin could take the koloss back?
It made so much sense. And yet, Ruin had played its hand well—it
had misled Elend, making him think that the Inquisitors were
controlling the koloss. Making him feel the koloss could be counted
on.
What would have
happened, he thought, if I'd attacked this city with them as
originally planned? Ruin would have ransacked Fadrex,
slaughtering everyone inside, and then turned the koloss on
Elend's soldiers. Now the fortifications defended by Elend and
Yomen's men had given Ruin enough pause to make it build up its
forces before attacking.
I have doomed
this city, Elend thought, sitting beside the bed of a man who
had lost his arm to a koloss blade.
It frustrated him.
He knew he'd made the right decision. And, in truth, he'd rather be
inside the city—almost certainly doomed—than be outside
besieging it, and winning. For he knew that the winning side wasn't
always the right side.
Still, it came back
to his continuing frustration at his inability to protect his people.
And, despite Yomen's rule of Fadrex, Elend considered its people to
be his people. He'd taken the Lord Ruler's throne, named himself
emperor. The entirety of the Final Empire was his to care for. What
good was a ruler who couldn't even protect one city, let alone an
empire full of them?
A disturbance at
the front of the infirmary room caught his attention. He cast aside
his dark thoughts, then bid farewell to the soldier. He rushed to the
front of the hospital, where Yomen had already appeared to see what
the ruckus was about. A woman stood holding a young boy, who was
shaking uncontrollably with the fits.
One of the
physicians rushed forward, taking the boy. "Mistsickness?"
he asked.
The woman, weeping,
nodded. "I kept him inside until today. I knew! I knew that it
wanted him! Oh, please . . ."
Yomen shook his
head as the physician took the boy to a bed. "You should have
listened to me, woman," he said firmly. "Everyone in the
city was to have been exposed to the mists. Now your son will take a
bed that we may need for wounded soldiers."
The woman slumped
down, still crying. Yomen sighed, though Elend could see the concern
in the man's eyes. Yomen was not a heartless man, just a pragmatic
one. In addition, his words made sense. It was no use hiding someone
inside all of their lives, just because of the possibility that they
might fall to the mists.
Fall to the
mists . . . Elend thought idly, glancing at the boy in bed. He
had stopped convulsing, though his face was twisted in an expression
of pain. It looked like he hurt so much. Elend had only hurt that
much once in his life.
We never did
figure out what this mistsickness was all about, he thought. The
mist spirit had never returned to him. But, perhaps Yomen knew
something.
"Yomen,"
he said, walking up to the man, distracting him from his discussion
with the surgeons. "Did any of your people ever figure out the
reason for the mist-sickness?"
"Reason?"
Yomen asked. "Does there need to be a reason for a sickness?"
"There does
for one this strange," Elend said. "Did you realize that it
strikes down exactly sixteen percent of the population? Sixteen
percent—to the man."
Instead of being
surprised, Yomen just shrugged. "Makes sense."
"Sense?"
Elend asked.
"Sixteen is a
powerful number, Venture," Yomen said, looking over some
reports. "It was the number of days it took the Lord Ruler to
reach the Well of Ascension, for instance. It figures prominently in
Church doctrine."
Of course,
Elend thought. Yomen wouldn't be surprised to find order in
nature—he believes in a god who ordered that nature.
"Sixteen . .
." Elend said, glancing at the sick boy.
"The number of
original Inquisitors," Yomen said. "The number of Precepts
in each Canton charter. The number of Allomantic metals. The—"
"Wait,"
Elend said, looking up. "What?"
"Allomantic
metals," Yomen said.
"There are
only fourteen of those."
Yomen shook his
head. "Fourteen we know of, assuming your lady was right about
the metal paired to aluminum. However, fourteen is not a number of
power. Allomantic metals come in sets of two, with groupings of four.
It seems likely that there are two more we haven't discovered,
bringing the number to sixteen. Two by two by two by two. Four
physical metals, four mental metals, four enhancement metals, and
four temporal metals."
Sixteen metals
. . .
Elend glanced at
the boy again. Pain. Elend had known such pain once—the day his
father had ordered him beaten. Beaten to give him such pain that he
thought he might die. Beaten to bring his body to a point near death,
so that he would Snap.
Beaten to discover
if he was an Allomancer.
Lord Ruler!
Elend thought with shock. He dashed away from Yomen, pushing
back into the soldiers' section of the infirmary.
"Who here was
taken by the mists?" Elend demanded.
The wounded
regarded him with quizzical looks.
"Did any of
you get sick?" Elend asked. "When I made you stand out in
the mists? Please, I must know!"
Slowly, the man
with one arm raised his remaining hand. "I was taken, my lord.
I'm sorry. This wound is probably punishment for—"
Elend cut the man
off, rushing forward, pulling out his spare metal vial. "Drink
this," he commanded.
The man paused,
then did as asked. Elend knelt beside the bed eagerly, waiting. His
heart pounded in his chest. "Well?" he finally asked.
"Well . . .
what, my lord?" the soldier asked.
"Do you feel
anything?" Elend asked.
The soldier
shrugged. "Tired, my lord?"
Elend closed his
eyes, sighing. It was a silly—
"Well, that's
odd," the soldier suddenly said.
Elend snapped his
eyes open.
"Yes,"
the soldier said, looking a bit distracted. "I . . . I don't
know what to make of that."
"Burn it,"
Elend said, turning on his bronze. "Your body knows how, if you
let it."
The soldier's frown
deepened, and he cocked his head. Then, he began to thump with
Allomantic power.
Elend closed his
eyes again, exhaling softly.
Yomen was walking
up behind Elend. "What is this?"
"The mists
were never our enemy, Yomen," Elend said, eyes still closed.
"They were just trying to help."
"Help? Help
how? What are you talking about?"
Elend opened his
eyes, turning. "They weren't killing us, Yomen. They weren't
making us sick. They were Snapping us. Bringing us power.
Making us able to fight."
"My lord!"
a voice suddenly called. Elend turned as a frazzled soldier stumbled
into the room. "My lords! The koloss are attacking! They're
charging the city!"
Elend felt a start.
Ruin. It knows what I just discovered—it knows it needs to
attack now, rather than wait for more troops.
Because I know
the secret!
"Yomen, gather
every bit of powdered metal you can find in this city!" Elend
yelled. "Pewter, tin, steel, and iron! Get it to anyone who has
been stricken by the mists! Make them drink it down!"
"Why?"
Yomen said, still confused.
Elend turned,
smiling. "Because they are now Allomancers. This city isn't
going to fall as easily as everyone assumed. If you need me, I'll be
on the front lines!"

There is
something special about the number sixteen. For one thing, it was
Preservation's sign to mankind.
Preservation
knew, even before he imprisoned Ruin, that he wouldn't be able to
communicate with humankind once he diminished himself. And so, he
left clues—clues that couldn't be altered by Ruin. Clues that
related back to the fundamental laws of the universe. The number was
meant to be proof that something unnatural was happening, and that
there was help to be found.
It may have
taken us long to figure this out, but when we eventually did
understand the clue—late though it was—it provided a
much-needed boost.
As for the
other aspects of the number . . . well, even I am still investigating
that. Suffice it to say that it has great ramifications regarding how
the world, and the universe itself, works.





71
SAZED
TAPPED HIS PEN against the metal paper, frowning slightly.
"Very little of this last chunk is different from what I knew
before," he said. "Ruin changed small things—perhaps
to keep me from noticing the alterations. It's obvious that he wanted
to make me realize that Vin was the Hero of Ages."
"He wanted her
to release him," said Haddek, leader of the First Generation.
His companions nodded.
"Perhaps she
was never the Hero," one of the others offered.
Sazed shook his
head. "I believe that she is. These prophecies still refer to
her—even the unaltered ones that you have told me. They talk of
one who is separate from the Terris people, a king of men, a rebel
caught between two worlds. Ruin just emphasized that Vin was
the one, since he wanted her to come and free him."
"We always
assumed that the Hero would be a man," Haddek said in his
wheezing voice.
"So did
everyone else," Sazed said. "But, you said yourself that
all the prophecies use gender-neutral pronouns. That had to be
intentional—one does not use such language in old Terris by
accident. The neutral case was chosen so that we wouldn't know
whether the Hero was male or female."
Several of the
ancient Terrismen nodded. They worked by the quiet blue light of the
glowing stones, still sitting in the chamber with the metal
walls—which, from what Sazed had been able to gather, was
something of a holy place for the kandra.
He tapped his pen,
frowning. What was bothering him? They say I will hold the future
of the entire world on my arms. . . . Alendi's words, from his
logbook written so long ago. The words of the First Generation
confirmed that was true.
There was still
something for Vin to do. Yet, the power at the Well of Ascension was
gone. Used up. How could she fight without it? Sazed looked up at his
audience of ancient kandra. "What was the power at the
Well of Ascension, anyway?"
"Even we are
not certain of that, young one," Haddek said. "By the time
we lived as men, our gods had already passed from this world, leaving
the Terris with only the hope of the Hero."
"Tell me of
this thing," Sazed said, leaning forward. "How did your
gods pass from this world?"
"Ruin and
Preservation," said one of the others. "They created our
world, and our people."
"Neither could
create alone," Haddek said. "No, they could not. For, to
preserve something is not to create it—and neither can you
create through destruction only."
It was a common
theme in mythology—Sazed had read it in dozens of the religions
he'd studied. The world being created out of a clash between two
forces, sometimes rendered as chaos and order, sometimes named
destruction and protection. That bothered him a little bit. He was
hoping to discover something new in the things men were
telling him.
And yet . . . just
because something was common, did that make it false? Or, could all
of those mythologies have a shared, and true, root?
"They created
the world," Sazed said. "Then left?"
"Not
immediately," Haddek said. "But, here is the trick, young
one. They had a deal, those two. Preservation wanted to create men—to
create life capable of emotion. He obtained a promise from Ruin to
help make men."
"But at a
cost," one of the others whispered.
"What cost?"
Sazed asked.
"That Ruin
could one day be allowed destroy the world," Haddek replied.
The circular
chamber fell silent.
"Hence the
betrayal," Haddek said. "Preservation gave his life to
imprison Ruin, to keep him from destroying the world."
Another common
mythological theme—the martyr god. It was one that Sazed
himself had witnessed in the birth of the Church of the Survivor.
Yet . . . this
time it's my own religion, he thought. He frowned, leaning back,
trying to decide how he felt. For some reason, he had assumed that
the truth would be different. The scholarly side of him
argued with his desire for belief. How could he believe in something
so filled with mythological clichés?
He'd come all this
way, believing that he'd been given one last chance to find the
truth. Yet, now that he studied it, he was finding that it was
shockingly similar to religions he had rejected as false.
"You seem
disturbed, child," Haddek said. "Are you that worried about
the things we say?"
"I apologize,"
Sazed said. "This is a personal problem, not related to the fate
of the Hero of Ages."
"Please,
speak," one of the others said.
"It is
complicated," Sazed said. "For some time now, I have been
searching through the religions of mankind, trying to ascertain which
of their teachings were true. I had begun to despair that I would
ever find a religion that offered the answers I sought. Then, I
learned that my own religion still existed, protected by the kandra.
I came here, hoping to find the truth."
"This is the
truth," one of the kandra said.
"That's what
every religion teaches," Sazed said, frustration
mounting. "Yet, in each of them I find inconsistencies, logical
leaps, and demands of faith I find impossible to accept.
"It sounds to
me, young one," Haddek said, "that you're searching for
something that cannot be found."
"The truth?"
Sazed said.
"No,"
Haddek replied. "A religion that requires no faith of its
believers."
Another of the
kandra elders nodded. "We follow the Father and the First
Contract, but our faith is not in him. It's in . . . something
higher. We trust that Preservation planned for this day, and that his
desire to protect will prove more powerful than Ruin's desire to
destroy."
"But you don't
know," Sazed said. "You are offered proof only once you
believe, but if you believe, you can find proof in anything. It is a
logical conundrum."
"Faith isn't
about logic, son," Haddek said. "Perhaps that's your
problem. You cannot 'disprove' the things you study, any more than we
can prove to you that the Hero will save us. We simply must believe
it, and accept the things Preservation has taught us."
It wasn't enough
for Sazed. However, for the moment, he decided to move on. He didn't
have all the facts about the Terris religion yet. Perhaps once he had
them, he would be able to sort this all out.
"You spoke of
the prison of Ruin," Sazed said. "Tell me how this relates
to the power that Lady Vin used."
"Gods don't
have bodies like those of men," Haddek said. "They are . .
. forces. Powers. Preservation's mind passed, but he left his power
behind."
"In the form
of a pool of liquid?" Sazed said.
The members of the
First Generation nodded.
"And the dark
black smoke outside?" Sazed asked.
"Ruin,"
Haddek said. "Waiting, watching, during his imprisonment."
Sazed frowned. "The
cavern of smoke was very much larger than the Well of Ascension. Why
the disparity? Was Ruin that much more powerful?"
Haddek snorted
quietly. "They were equally powerful, young one. They were
forces, not men. Two aspects of a single power. Is one side
of a coin more 'powerful' than the other? They pushed equally upon
the world around them."
"Though,"
one of the others added, "there is a story that Preservation
gave too much of himself to make mankind, to create something that
had more of Preservation in them than they had of Ruin. Yet,
it would be only a small amount in each individual. Tiny . . . easy
to miss, except over a long, long time . . ."
"So, why the
difference in size?" Sazed asked.
"You aren't
seeing, young one," Haddek said. "The power in that pool,
that wasn't Preservation."
"But, you just
said—"
"It was part
of Preservation, to be sure," Haddek continued. "But, he
was a force—his influence is everywhere. Some of it, perhaps,
concentrated into that pool. The rest is . . . elsewhere and
everywhere."
"But Ruin, his
mind was focused there," another kandra said. "And so, his
power tended to coalesce there. Much more of it, at least, than that
of Preservation."
"But not all
of it," another one said, laughing.
Sazed cocked his
head. "Not all of it? It, too, was spread out across the world,
I assume?"
"In a way,"
Haddek said.
"We now speak
of things in the First Contract," one of the other kandra
warned.
Haddek paused, then
turned, studying Sazed's eyes. "If what this man says is true,
then Ruin has escaped. That means he will be coming for his body. His
. . . power."
Sazed felt a chill.
"It's here?" he asked quietly.
Haddek nodded. "We
were to gather it. The First Contract, the Lord Ruler named it—our
charge in this world."
"The other
Children had a purpose," another kandra added. "The koloss,
they were created to fight. The Inquisitors, they were created to be
priests. Our task was different."
"Gather the
power," Haddek said. "And protect it. Hide it. Keep it. For
the Father knew Ruin would escape one day. And on that day, he would
begin searching for his body."
The group of aged
kandra looked past Sazed. He frowned, turning to follow their eyes.
They were looking toward the metal dais.
Slowly, Sazed
stood, walking across the stone floor. The dais was large—perhaps
twenty feet across—but not very high. He stepped onto it,
causing one of the kandra behind him to gasp. Yet, none of them
called out to stop him.
There was a seam
down the middle of the circular platform, and a hole—perhaps
the size of a large coin—at the center. Sazed peered through
the hole, but it was too dark to see anything.
He stepped back.
I should have a
little left, he thought, glancing toward his table, with its
metal-minds. I refilled that ring for a few months before I gave
up on my metalminds.
He walked over
quickly, selecting a small pewter ring off of the table. He slipped
it on, then looked up at the members of the First Generation. They
turned from his querying look.
"Do what you
must, child," Haddek said, his aged voice echoing in the room.
"We could not stop you if we wished."
Sazed walked back
to the dais, then tapped his pewtermind for the strength he had
stored in it over a year ago. His body immediately grew several times
stronger than normal, and his robes suddenly felt tight. With hands
now thick with muscles, he reached down and—bracing himself
against the rough floor—shoved against one side of the disk on
the floor.
It ground against
stone as it moved, uncovering a large pit. Something glittered
beneath.
Sazed froze, his
strength—and body—deflating as he released his
pewtermind. His robes became loose again. The room was silent. Sazed
stared at the half-covered pit, and at the enormous pile of nuggets
hidden in the floor.
"The Trust, we
call it," Haddek said with a soft voice. "Given for our
safekeeping by the Father."
Atium. Thousands
upon thousands of beads of it. Sazed gasped. "The Lord Ruler's
atium stockpile . . . It was here all along."
"Most of that
atium never left the Pits of Hathsin," Haddek said. "There
were obligators on staff at all times—but never Inquisitors,
for the Father knew that they could be corrupted. The obligators
broke the geodes in secret, inside of a metal room constructed for
the purpose, then took out the atium. The noble family then
transported the empty geodes to Luthadel, never knowing that they
didn't have any atium in their possession at all. What atium the Lord
Ruler did get, and distribute, to the nobility was brought in by the
obligators. They disguised the atium as Ministry funds and hid the
beads in piles of coins so that Ruin wouldn't see them as they were
transported in convoys full of new acolytes to Luthadel."
Sazed stood,
dumbstruck. Here . . . all along. Just a short distance from the
very caves where Kelsier raised his army. A short journey from
Luthadel, completely unprotected all these years.
Yet hidden so
well.
"You worked
for atium," Sazed said, looking up. "The kandra Contracts,
they were paid in atium."
Haddek nodded. "We
were to gather all of it we could. What didn't end up in our hands,
the Mistborn burned away. Some of the houses kept small stockpiles,
but the Father's taxes and fees kept most of the atium flowing back
to him as payments. And, eventually, almost all of it ended up here."
Sazed looked down.
Such a fortune, he thought. Such . . . power. Atium
never had fit in with the other metals. Every one of them,
even aluminum and duralumin, could be mined or created through
natural processes. Atium, however—it had only ever come from a
single place, its appearance mysterious and strange. Its power had
allowed one to do something unlike anything else in Allomancy or
Feruchemy.
It let one see the
future. Not a thing of men at all, more . . . a thing of gods.
It was more than
just a metal. It was condensed concentrated power. Power that Ruin
would want. Very badly.
TenSoon pushed
toward the crest of the hill, moving through ash that was so high
that he was glad he had switched to the horse's body, for a wolfhound
could never have moved through piles so deep.
The ash fell
strongly where he was, limiting his visibility. I will never make
it to Fadrex at this rate, he thought with anger. Even pushing
hard, moving in the massive horse's body, he was moving too slowly to
get far from the Homeland.
He finally crested
the hill, his breath coming in puffing snorts out the horse's snout.
At the top of the
hill he froze, shocked. The landscape before him was burning.
Tyrian, closest of
the ashmounts to Luthadel, stood in the near distance, half of its
top blown free from some violent eruption. The air itself seemed to
burn with tongues of flame, and the broad plain in front of TenSoon
was clogged with flowing lava. It was a deep, powerful red. Even from
a distance, he could feel the heat pushing against him.
He stood for a long
moment, deep in ash, gazing upon a landscape that had once contained
villages, forests, and roads. All was now gone, burnt away. The earth
had cracked in the distance, and more lava seemed to be spilling out
of it.
By the First
Contract, he thought with despair. He could detour to the south,
continue on to Fadrex as if he'd come in a straight line from
Luthadel, but for some reason, he found it hard to get up the
motivation.
It was too late.

Yes, there are
sixteen metals. I find it highly unlikely that the Lord Ruler did not
know of them all. Indeed, the fact that he spoke of several on the
plates in the storage caches meant that he knew at least of those.
I must assume
that he did not tell mankind of them earlier for a reason. Perhaps he
held them back to give him a secret edge, much as he kept back the
single nugget of Preservation's body that made men into Mistborn.
Or, perhaps he
simply decided that mankind had enough power in the ten metals they
already understood. Some things we shall never know. Part of me still
finds what he did regrettable. During the thousand-year reign of the
Lord Ruler, how many people were born, Snapped, lived, and died never
knowing that they were Mistings, simply because their metals were
unknown?
Of course, this
did give us a slight advantage, at the end. Ruin had a lot of trouble
giving duralumin to his Inquisitors, since they'd need an Allomancer
who could burn it to kill before they could use it. And, since none
of the duralumin Mistings in the world knew about their power, they
didn't burn it and reveal themselves to Ruin. That left most
Inquisitors without the power of duralumin, save in a few important
cases—such as Marsh—where they got it from a Mistborn.
This was usually considered a waste, for if one killed a Mistborn
with Hemalurgy, one could draw out only one of their sixteen powers
and lost the rest. Ruin considered it much better to try to subvert
them and gain access to all of their power.





72
IT BEGAN
RAINING just before Vin reached Luthadel. A quiet, cold
drizzle that wetted the night, but did not banish the mists.
She flared her
bronze. In the distance, she could sense Allomancers. Mistborn.
Chasing her. There were at least a dozen of them, homing in on her
position.
She landed on the
city wall, bare feet slipping just slightly on the stones. Beyond her
stretched Luthadel, even now proud in its sprawl. Founded a thousand
years before by the Lord Ruler, it was built atop the Well of
Ascension itself. During the ten centuries of his reign, Luthadel had
burgeoned, becoming the most important—and most crowded—place
in all of the empire.
And it was dying.
Vin stood up
straight, looking out over the vast city. Pockets of flame flared
where buildings had caught fire. The flames defied the rain,
illuminating the various slums and other neighborhoods like watch
fires in the night. In their light, she could see that the city was a
wreck. Entire swathes of the town had been torn apart, the buildings
broken or burned. The streets were eerily vacant—nobody fought
the fires, nobody huddled in the gutters.
The capital, once
home to hundreds of thousands, seemed empty. Wind blew through Vin's
rain-wetted hair and she felt a shiver. The mists, as usual, stayed
away from her—pushed aside by her Allomancy. She was alone in
the largest city in the world.
No. Not alone. She
could feel them approaching—Ruin's minions. She had led them
here, made them assume that she was bringing them to the atium. There
would be far more of them than she could fight. She was doomed.
That was the idea.
She launched off
the wall, shooting through the mist, ash, and rain. She wore her
mistcloak, more out of nostalgia than utility. It was the same one
she'd always had—the one that Kelsier had given her on her very
first night of training.
She landed with a
splash atop a building, then leaped again, bounding over the city.
She wasn't certain if it was poetic or ominous that it was raining
this night. There had been another night when she had visited Kredik
Shaw in the rain. A part of her still thought she should have died
that night.
She landed on the
street, then stood upright, her tasseled mistcloak falling around
her, hiding her arms and chest. She stood quietly, looking up at
Kredik Shaw, the Hill of a Thousand Spires. The Lord Ruler's palace,
location of the Well of Ascension.
The building was an
assemblage of several low wings topped by dozens of rising towers,
spires, and spines. The awful near-symmetry of the amalgamation was
only made more unsettling by the presence of the mists and ash. The
building had been abandoned since the Lord Ruler's death. The doors
were broken, and she could see shattered windows in the walls. Kredik
Shaw was as dead as the city it once had dominated.
A figure stepped up
beside her. "Here?" Ruin said. "This is where you lead
me? We have searched this place."
Vin remained quiet,
looking up at the spires. Black fingers of metal reaching up into a
blacker sky.
"My
Inquisitors are coming," Ruin whispered.
"You shouldn't
have revealed yourself," Vin said, not looking toward him. "You
should have waited until I retrieved the atium. I'll never do it
now."
"Ah, but I no
longer believe that you have it," Ruin said in his
fatherly voice. "Child . . . child. I believed you at
first—indeed, I gathered my powers, ready to face you. When you
came here, however, I knew that you had misled me."
"You don't
know that for certain," Vin said softly, voice complemented by
the quiet rain.
Silence. "No,"
Ruin finally said.
"Then you'll
have to try to make me talk," she whispered.
"Try?
You realize the forces I can bring to bear against you, child? You
realize the power I have, the destruction I represent? I am mountains
that crush. I am waves that crash. I am storms that shatter. I am the
end."
Vin continued to
stare up into the falling rain. She didn't question her plan—it
wasn't really her way. She'd decided what to do. It was time to
spring Ruin's trap.
She was tired of
being manipulated.
"You will
never have it," Vin said. "Not while I live."
Ruin screamed, a
sound of primal anger, of something that had to destroy.
Then, he vanished. Lightning flared, its light a wave of power moving
through the mist. It illuminated robed figures in the blackened rain,
walking toward her. Surrounding her.
Vin turned toward a
ruined building a short distance away, watching as a figure climbed
up over the rubble. Now lit only faintly by starlight, the figure had
a bare chest, a stark rib cage, and taut muscles. Rain ran down his
skin, dripping from the spikes that sprouted from his chest. One
between each set of ribs. His face bore spikes in the eyes—one
of which had been pounded back into his skull, crushing the socket.
Normal Inquisitors
had nine spikes. The one she'd killed with Elend had ten. Marsh
appeared to have upward of twenty. He growled softly.
And the fight
began.
Vin flung back her
cloak, spraying water from the tassels, and Pushed herself forward.
Thirteen Inquisitors hurtled through the night sky toward her. Vin
ducked a flight of axe swings, then slammed a Push toward a pair of
Inquisitors, burning duralumin. The creatures were thrown backward by
their spikes, and Vin accelerated in a sudden lurch to the side.
She hit another
Inquisitor, feet against his chest. Water sprayed, flecked with ash,
as Vin reached down and grabbed one of the spikes in the Inquisitor's
eyes. Then she Pulled herself backward and flared pewter.
She lurched, and
the spike came free. The Inquisitor screamed, but did not fall dead.
It looked at her, one side of the head a gaping hole, and hissed.
Removing one eye-spike, apparently, wasn't enough to kill.
Ruin laughed in her
head.
The spikeless
Inquisitor reached for her, and Vin Pulled herself into the sky,
yanking on one of the metal spires of Kredik Shaw. She downed the
contents of a metal vial as she flew, restoring her steel.
A dozen figures in
black robes sprang up through the falling rain to follow. Marsh
remained below, watching.
Vin gritted her
teeth, then whipped out a pair of daggers and Pushed herself back
down—directly toward the Inquisitors. She passed among them,
surprising several, who had probably expected her to jump away. She
slammed directly into the creature she'd pulled the spike from,
spinning him in the air, ramming her daggers into his chest. He
gritted his teeth, laughing, then slapped her arms apart and kicked
her back toward the ground.
She fell with the
rain.
Vin hit hard, but
managed to land on her feet. The Inquisitor hit the cobblestones
back-first, her daggers still in his chest. But he stood up easily,
tossing the daggers aside, shattering them on the cobblestones.
Then he moved
suddenly. Too quickly. Vin didn't have time to think as he
splashed through the misty rain, grabbing her by the throat.
I've seen that
speed before , she thought as she struggled. Not just from
Inquisitors. From Sazed. That's a Feruchemical power. Just like the
strength Marsh used earlier.
That was the reason
for the new spikes. These other Inquisitors didn't have as many as
Marsh, but they obviously had some new powers. Strength. Speed. Each
of these creatures was, essentially, another Lord Ruler.
You see? Ruin
asked.
Vin cried out,
duralumin-Pushing against the Inquisitor, tearing herself out of his
grasp. The move left her throat bleeding from his fingernails, and
she had to down another vial of metals—her last—to
restore her steel as she hydroplaned across the wet ground.
Feruchemical
storages run out, she told herself. Even Allomancers make
mistakes. I can win.
Yet, she wavered,
breathing heavily as she came to a rest, one hand to the ground, up
to the wrist in cold rainwater. Kelsier had struggled fighting one
Inquisitor. What was she doing fighting thirteen?
Sodden-robed
figures landed around her. Vin kicked, slamming a foot into an
Inquisitor chest, then Pulled herself off to spin away from another
one. She rolled across the slick cobblestones, an obsidian axe nearly
taking off her head as she came up and kicked two pewter-enhanced
feet at the knees of an opponent.
Bones crunched. The
Inquisitor screamed and fell. Vin pushed herself to her feet with one
hand, then Pulled on the spires up above, throwing herself up about
ten feet to dodge the multitude of swings that came after her.
She landed back on
the ground, grabbing the handle of the fallen Inquisitor's axe. She
swung it up, spraying water, her skin stained with wet ash as she
blocked a blow.
You cannot
fight, Vin, Ruin said. Each blow only helps me. I am Ruin.
She screamed,
throwing herself forward in a reckless attack, shouldering aside one
Inquisitor, then slamming her axe into the side of another. They
growled and swung, but she stayed a step ahead, barely dodging their
attacks. The one she had knocked down stood back up, his knees
healed. He was smiling.
A blow she didn't
see took her in the shoulder, throwing her forward. She felt warm
blood running down her back, but pewter deadened the pain. She threw
herself to the side, regaining her feet, clutching her axe.
The Inquisitors
stalked forward. Marsh watched quietly, rain dripping down his face,
spikes protruding from his body like the spires of Kredik Shaw. He
did not join the fight.
Vin growled, then
Pulled herself into the sky again. She shot ahead of her foes, and
bounded from spire to spire, using their metal as anchors. The twelve
Inquisitors followed like a flock of ravens, leaping between spires,
robes flapping, taking different paths than she. She lurched through
the mists, which continued to spin around her in defiance of the
rain.
An Inquisitor
landed against the spike she was aiming for. She yelled, swinging her
axe in an overhand blow as she landed, but he Pushed off—dodging
her swing—then Pulled himself right back. She kicked at his
feet, sending both herself and her opponent sprawling into the air.
Then, she grabbed his robe as they fell.
He looked up, teeth
clenched in a smile, knocking her axe out of her hand with an
inhumanly strong hand. His body began to swell, gaining the unnatural
bulk of a Feruchemist tapping strength. He laughed at Vin, grabbing
her neck. He didn't even notice as Vin Pulled them both slightly to
the side as they fell through the air.
They hit one of the
lower spikes, the metal piercing the surprised Inquisitor's chest.
Vin wrenched herself to the side, out of the way, but hung on to his
head, her weight pulling him down the spire. She didn't look as the
spike ripped through his body, but when she hit the ground below, she
was holding only a head. A disembodied spike splashed into an ashen
puddle beside her, and she dropped the dead creature's head beside
it.
Marsh screamed in
anger. Four more Inquisitors landed around her. Vin kicked at one,
but it moved with Feruchemical speed, catching her foot. Another
grabbed her by the arm and wrenched her to the side. She cried out,
kicking her way free, but a third one grabbed her, his grip enhanced
by both Allomantic and Feruchemical strength. The other three
followed, holding her with claw-like fingers.
Taking a deep
breath, Vin extinguished her tin, then burned duralumin, steel, and
pewter. She Pushed outward with a sudden wave of power; Inquisitors
were thrown back by their spikes. They sprawled, falling to the
ground, cursing.
Vin hit the
cobblestones. Suddenly, the pain in her back and her throat seemed
impossibly strong. She flared tin to clear her mind, but still
stumbled, woozily, as she climbed to her feet. She'd used up all of
her pewter in that one burst.
She moved to run,
and found a figure standing in front of her. Marsh was silent, though
another wave of lightning lit the mists.
Her pewter was
gone. She was bleeding from a wound that probably would have killed
anyone else. She was desperate.
Okay. Now! she
thought as Marsh slapped her. The blow threw her to the ground.
Nothing happened.
Come on! Vin
thought, trying to draw upon the mists. Terror twisted within her as
Marsh loomed, a black figure in the night. Please!
Each time the mists
had helped her, they had done so when she was most desperate. This
was her plan, weak though it seemed: to put herself in more trouble
than she'd ever been in before, then count on the mists to help her.
As they had twice before.
Marsh knelt over
her. Images flashed like bursts of lightning through her tired mind.
Camon, raising a
meaty hand to beat her. Rain falling on her as she huddled in a dark
corner, her side aching from a deep gash. Zane turning toward her as
they stood at the top of Keep Hasting, one of his hands dripping a
slow stream of blood.
Vin tried to
scramble away across the slick, cold cobblestones, but her body
wasn't working right. She could barely crawl. Marsh slammed a fist
down on her leg, shattering the bone, and she cried out in shocked,
icy pain. No pewter tempered the blow. She tried to pull herself up
to grab one of Marsh's spikes, but he snatched her leg—the
broken one—and her own effort just made her scream in agony.
Now, Ruin
said in his kindly voice, we will begin. Where is the atium, Vin?
What do you know of it?
"Please . . ."
Vin whispered, reaching toward the mists. "Please, please,
please . . ."
Yet, they remained
aloof. Once, they had swirled playfully around her body, but now they
pulled back instead. Just as they'd done for the entire last year.
She was crying, reaching for them, but they puffed away. Shunning her
like a victim of the plague.
It was the same way
the mists treated the Inquisitors.
The creatures rose,
surrounding her, silhouettes in the dark night. Marsh yanked her back
to him, then reached for her arm. She heard her bone snap before she
felt the pain. It came, however, and she screamed.
It had been a long
time since she'd known torture. The streets had not been kind, but
during the last few years, she'd been able to repress most of those
experiences. She'd become a Mistborn. Powerful. Protected.
Not this time,
she realized through the haze of agony. Sazed won't come for
me this time. Kelsier won't save me. Even the mists have abandoned
me. I'm alone.
Her teeth began to
chatter, and Marsh raised her other arm. He looked down at her with
spiked eyes, expression unreadable. Then snapped the bone.
Vin screamed, more
from the terror than the pain.
Marsh watched her
scream, listening to its sweetness. He smiled, then reached down for
her unbroken leg. If only Ruin weren't holding him back. Then he
could kill her. He strained against his bonds, lusting to do her more
harm.
No . . . a
tiny piece of him thought.
The rain fell,
marking a beautiful night. The city of Luthadel lay bedecked in its
funereal best, smoldering, some parts still burning despite the wet
night. How he wished he'd arrived in time to see the riots and the
death. He smiled, the passionate love of a fresh kill rising in him.
No, he
thought.
He knew, somehow,
that the end was very near. The ground trembled beneath his feet, and
he had to steady himself with one hand before continuing his work,
snapping Vin's other leg. The final day had arrived. The world would
not survive this night. He laughed gleefully, fully in the throes of
a blood frenzy, barely controlled as he broke Vin's body.
NO!
Marsh awakened.
Though his hands still moved as ordered, his mind rebelled. He took
in the ash, and the rain, the blood and the soot, and it disgusted
him. Vin lay nearly dead.
Kelsier treated
her like a daughter, he thought as he broke her fingers, one at
a time. She was screaming. The daughter he never had with Mare.
I've given up.
Just like I did with the rebellion.
It was the great
shame of his life. Years ago, before the Collapse, he had led the
skaa rebellion. But, he'd given in. He'd withdrawn, giving up
leadership of the group. And he'd done it only one year before the
rebellion—with Kelsier's help—finally overthrew the Final
Empire. Marsh had been its leader, but had given up. Just before the
victory.
No , he
thought as he broke the fingers on her other hand. Not again. No
more giving up!
His hand moved up
to her collarbone. And then he saw it. A single bit of metal,
glittering in Vin's ear. Her earring. She'd explained it to him once.
I don't
remember it, Vin's voice whispered to him from the past. A
memory of when Marsh himself had sat with her on a quiet veranda at
Mansion Renoux, watching Kelsier organize a caravan below, just
before Marsh left to infiltrate the ranks of the Steel Priesthood.
Vin had spoken of
her insane mother. Reen said that he came home one day and found
my mother covered in blood, Vin had said. She'd killed my
baby sister. Me, however, she hadn't touched—except to give me
an earring . . .
Don't trust
anyone pierced by metal. Spook's letter. Even the smallest
bit can taint a man.
The smallest
bit.
As he looked
closer, the earring—though twisted and chipped—looked
almost like a tiny spike.
He didn't think. He
didn't give Ruin time to react. Amid the thrill of killing the Hero
of Ages, Ruin's control was weaker than it had ever been. Summoning
all the will he had remaining, Marsh reached out.
And ripped the
earring from Vin's ear.
Vin's eyes snapped
open.
Ash and water fell
on her. Her body burned with pain, and the echoing screams of Ruin's
demands still reverberated in her head.
But the voice spoke
no further. It had been stifled midsentence.
What?
The mists returned
to her with a snap. They flowed around her, sensing the Allomancy of
her tin, which she still burned faintly. They spun around her as they
once had, playful, friendly.
She was dying. She
knew it. Marsh was done with her bones, and was obviously growing
impatient. He screamed, holding his head. Then, he reached down,
grabbing his axe from the puddle beside him. Vin couldn't have run if
she'd wanted to.
Fortunately, the
pain was fading. Everything was fading. It was black.
Please, she
thought, reaching out to the mists with one final plea. They felt so
familiar all of a sudden. Where had she felt that feeling before?
Where did she know them?
From the Well
of Ascension, of course, a voice whispered in her head. It's
the same power, after all. Solid in the metal you fed to Elend.
Liquid in the pool you burned. And vapor in the air, confined to
night. Hiding you. Protecting you.
Giving you
power!
Vin gasped, drawing
in breath—a breath that sucked in the mists. She felt suddenly
warm, the mists surging within her, lending her their strength. Her
entire body burned like metal, and the pain disappeared in a flash.
Marsh swung his axe
for her head, spraying water.
And she caught his
arm.

I have spoken
of Inquisitors, and their ability to pierce copperclouds. As I said,
this power is easily understood when one realizes that many
Inquisitors were Seekers before their transformation, and that meant
their bronze became twice as strong.
There is at
least one other case of a person who could pierce copperclouds. In
her case, however, the situation was slightly different. She was a
Mistborn from birth, and her sister was the Seeker. The death of that
sister–and subsequent inheritance of power via the Hemalurgic
spike used to kill that sister–left her twice as good at
burning bronze as a typical Mistborn. And that let her see through
the copperclouds of lesser Allomancers.





73
THE MISTS
CHANGED.
TenSoon looked up
through the ash. He lay, exhausted and numb, atop the hill before the
field of lava that barred his path eastward. His muscles felt
lethargic—signs that he had been pushing too hard. Even the
Blessing of Potency could only do so much.
He stood, forcing
his horse's body to rise, looking at his nighttime surroundings.
Endless fields of ash extended behind him; even the track he had worn
up to the top of the hill was close to being filled in. The lava
burned ahead of him. However, something seemed different. What?
The mists flowed,
moving about, swirling. Generally, the mists had a very chaotic
pattern. Some parts would flow one way, while others would spin about
in other directions. There were often rivers of motion, but they
never conformed to one another. Most often, they followed the wind;
this night the wind was still.
And yet, the mist
seemed to be flowing in one direction. As soon as he noticed it,
TenSoon found it one of the most singularly strange sights he had
ever beheld. Instead of swirling or spinning, the mists moved
together in a seemingly purposeful flow. They coursed around him, and
he felt like a stone in a huge, incorporeal river.
The mists flowed
toward Luthadel. Perhaps I'm not too late! he thought,
regaining some of his hope. He shook himself from his stupor, and
took off in a gallop back the way he had come.
"Breezy, come
look at this."
Breeze rubbed his
eyes, looking across the room to where Allrianne sat in her
nightgown, looking out the window. It was late—too late. He
should have been asleep.
He looked back
toward his desk, and the treaty he had been working on. It was the
sort of thing Sazed or Elend should have had to write, not Breeze.
"You know," he said, "I distinctly remember telling
Kelsier that I did not want to end up in charge of anything
important. Running kingdoms and cities is work for fools, not
thieves! Government is far too inefficient to provide a suitable
income."
"Breezy!"
Allrianne said insistently, Pulling on his emotions quite blatantly.
He sighed, rising.
"Very well," he grumbled. Honestly, he thought.
How is it, of all the qualified people in Kelsier's little crew,
that I end up the one leading a city?
He joined Allrianne
at the window, peeking out. "What is it exactly I'm supposed to
see, dear? I don't . . ."
He trailed off,
frowning. Beside him, Allrianne touched his arm, seeming concerned as
she looked out the window.
"Now, that is
strange," he said. The mists flowed by outside, moving like a
river—and they seemed to be accelerating.
The door to his
room slammed open. Breeze jumped, and Allrianne squeaked. They spun
to find Spook standing in the doorway, still half covered in
bandages.
"Gather the
people," the boy croaked, holding the doorframe to keep from
collapsing. "We need to move."
"My dear boy,"
Breeze said, unsettled. Allrianne took Breeze's arm, holding on
quietly, yet tightly. "My dear boy, what is this? You should be
in bed!"
"Gather them,
Breeze!" Spook said, suddenly sounding very authoritative. "Take
them to the storage cavern. Pack them in! Quickly! We don't have much
time!"
"What do you
make of it?" Ham asked, wiping his brow. Blood immediately oozed
from the cut again, running down the side of his face.
Elend shook his
head, breathing deeply—almost in gasps—as he leaned back
against the side of a jagged rock outcropping. He closed his eyes,
fatigue making his body shake despite his pewter. "I don't
really care about mists right now, Ham," he whispered. "I
can barely think straight."
Ham grunted in
agreement. Around them, men screamed and died, fighting the endless
waves of koloss. They had some of the creatures bottled up in the
natural stone corridor leading into Fadrex, but the real fights were
happening on the rugged rock formations that enclosed the city. Too
many koloss, tired of waiting outside, had begun crawling up to
attack from the sides.
It was a precarious
battlefield, one that often demanded Elend's attention. They had a
large number of Allomancers, but most of them were inexperienced—they
hadn't even known about their powers until this very day. Elend was a
oneman reserve force, bounding across the defensive lines, plugging
holes while Cett directed tactics below.
More screams. More
death. More metal hitting metal, rock, and flesh. Why? Elend
thought with frustration. Why can't I protect them? He
flared pewter, taking a deep breath and standing up in the night.
The mists flowed
overhead, as if pulled by some invisible force. For a moment, even
exhausted as he was, he froze.
"Lord
Venture!" someone shouted. Elend spun, looking toward the sound.
A youthful messenger scrambled up the side of the rock outcropping,
wide-eyed.
Oh, no . . .
Elend thought, tensing.
"My lord,
they're retreating!" the lad said, stumbling to a halt before
Elend.
"What?"
Ham asked, standing.
"It's true, my
lord. They pulled back from the city gates! They're leaving."
Elend immediately
dropped a coin, shooting himself into the sky. Mist flowed around
him, its tendrils a million tiny strings being yanked eastward.
Below, he saw the hulking, dark forms of the koloss running away in
the night.
So many of
them, he thought, landing on a rock formation. We'd never
have beaten them. Even with Allomancers.
But, they were
leaving. Running away at an inhuman speed. Moving . . .
Toward Luthadel.
Vin fought like a
tempest, spraying rainwater through the dark night as she threw back
Inquisitor after Inquisitor.
She shouldn't have
been alive. She'd run out of pewter, yet she felt it flaring inside,
burning brighter than it ever had before. She felt as if the bleeding
sun itself blazed within her, running molten through her veins.
Her every Steelpush
or Ironpull slammed against her as if it were made with the power of
duralumin. Yet, the metal reserves within her did not vanish.
Instead, they grew stronger. Vaster. She wasn't certain what was
happening to her. However, she did know one thing.
Suddenly, fighting
twelve Inquisitors at once did not seem like an impossible task.
She cried out,
slapping an Inquisitor to the side, then ducking a pair of axes. She
crouched, then jumped, leaping in an arc through the rain, coming
down beside Marsh, who still lay stunned from where she had thrown
him after her rebirth.
He looked up,
finally seeming to focus on her, then cursed and rolled away as Vin
punched downward. Her fist shattered a cobblestone, throwing back a
ripple of dark rainwater, splashing her arms and face, leaving specks
of black ash behind.
She looked up
toward Marsh. He stood erect, bare-chested, his spikes glistening in
the darkness.
Vin smiled, then
spun on the Inquisitors rushing her from behind. She yelled, dodging
a swinging axe. Had these creatures ever seemed quick to her? Within
the embrace of limitless pewter, she seemed to move as the mist
itself did. Light. Quick.
Unchained.
The sky spun in a
tempest of its own as she attacked, moving in a swirling frenzy. The
mists whirled around her arm in a vortex as she punched one
Inquisitor in the face, throwing him backward. The mists danced
before her as she caught the fallen Inquisitor's axe, then sheared
the arm off another of the creatures. She took his head next, leaving
the others stunned with the speed of her motion.
That's two
dead.
They attacked
again. She bounded backward, Pulling herself toward the spires above.
The trail of ravens launched after her, their robes snapping in the
wet darkness. She hit a spire feet-first, then launched upward and
Pulled on an Inquisitor's spikes, something that was easy to do with
her new power. Her chosen quarry lurched upward ahead of his
companions.
Vin shot downward,
meeting the Inquisitor in the air. She grabbed him by the eye-spikes
and pulled, ripping them out with her newfound strength. Then she
kicked off the creature and Pushed against the spikes in his chest.
She shot upward in
the air, leaving a corpse flipping end over end in the rain beneath
her, massive gaps in its head where the spikes had been. They could
lose some spikes and live, she knew, but the removal of others was
deadly. Losing both eye-spikes appeared to be enough to kill them.
Three.
Inquisitors hit the
spire she had Pushed off of, and they leaped up to follow her. Vin
smiled, then threw the spikes she still carried, catching one of the
Inquisitors in the chest with them. Then, she Pushed. The unfortunate
Inquisitor was thrown downward, and he hit a flat rooftop so
violently that it pushed several of his spikes up out of his body.
They sparkled and spun in the air, then fell beside his immobile
corpse.
Four.
Vin's mistcloak
fluttered as she shot upward in the sky. Eight Inquisitors still
chased her, reaching for her. Crying out, Vin raised her hands toward
the creatures as she began to fall. Then, she Pushed.
She hadn't realized
how strong her new powers were. They were obviously akin to
duralumin, since she could affect the spikes inside of an
Inquisitor's body. Her overpowering Push forced the whole flock of
them downward, as if they'd been swatted. In fact, her Push also hit
the metal spire directly beneath her.
The stone
architecture holding the spire in place exploded, spraying chips and
dust outward as the spire itself crushed the building beneath it. And
Vin was thrown upward.
Very quickly.
She blasted through
the sky, mists streaking past her, the force of her Push straining
even her mist-enhanced body with the stress of sudden acceleration.
And then she was
out. She emerged into the open air, like a fish leaping from the
water. Beneath her, the mists covered the nighttime land like an
enormous white blanket. Around her, there was only open air.
Unsettling, strange. Above her, a million stars—normally
visible only to Allomancers—watched her like the eyes of those
long dead.
Her momentum ran
out, and she spun quietly, whiteness below, light above. She notice
that she'd trailed a line of mist up out of the main cloud. This hung
like a tether ready to pull her back down. In fact, all the mists
were spinning slightly in what looked like an enormous weather
pattern. A whirlpool of white.
The heart of the
whirlpool was directly beneath her.
She fell,
plummeting back down toward the earth below. She entered the mists,
drawing them behind her, breathing them in. Even as she fell, she
could feel them surging about her in a massive, empire-wide spiral.
She welcomed them into herself, and the vortex of mist around her
grew more and more violent.
Instants later,
Luthadel appeared, a massive black welt upon the land. She fell down,
streaking toward Kredik Shaw and its spires, which seemed to be
pointing toward her. The Inquisitors were still there—she could
see them standing on a flat rooftop amid the spires, looking up.
Waiting. There were only eight, not counting Marsh. One lay impaled
on a nearby spike from her last push; the blow had apparently torn
the center spike out of his back.
Five, Vin
thought, landing a short distance from the Inquisitors.
If a single Push
could throw her up so far she passed out of the mists, then what
would happen if she Pushed outward?
She waited quietly
as the Inquisitors charged. She could see desperation in their
movements. Whatever was happening to Vin, Ruin was apparently willing
to risk every one of the creatures in the hopes that they would kill
her before she was complete. Mists pulled toward her, moving more and
more quickly, drawn into her like water being sucked down a drain.
When the
Inquisitors had almost reached her, she Pushed outward
again, throwing metal away from her with all the force as she could
muster, while at the same time strengthening her body with a massive
flare of pewter. Stone cracked. Inquisitors cried out.
And Kredik Shaw
exploded.
Towers toppled from
their foundations. Doors ripped free from their frames. Windows
shattered. Blocks burst, the entire structure torn to pieces as its
metals lurched away. She screamed as she Pushed, the ground trembling
beneath her. Everything—even the rock and stone, which
obviously contained residual traces of metal ore—was thrown
violently back.
She gasped,
stopping her Push. She drew in breath, feeling the rain splatter
against her. The building that had been the Lord Ruler's palace was
gone, flattened to rubble which spread out and away from her like an
impact crater.
An Inquisitor burst
from the rubble, face bleeding from where one of his spikes had
ripped free. Vin raised a hand, Pulling and steadying herself from
behind. The Inquisitor's head lurched, his other eye-spike pulling
free. He toppled forward, and Vin caught the spike, Pushing it toward
another Inquisitor who was rushing her. He raised a hand to Push it
back at her.
And she drove it
forward anyway, ignoring his Push with a quick Push backward to
stabilize herself. He was thrown away and slammed into the remnants
of a wall. The spike continued forward, Pushed like a fish darting
through water, ignoring the current. The spike slammed into the
Inquisitor's face, crushing it, pinning his head back against the
granite.
Six and seven.
Vin stalked across
the rubble, mists storming. Overhead, they swirled furiously, forming
a funnel cloud with her at its focus. It was like a tornado, but with
no air currents. Just impalpable mists, as if painted on the air.
Spinning, swirling, coming to her silent command.
She stepped over an
Inquisitor corpse that had been crushed by the rubble; she kicked his
head free to make certain he was dead.
Eight.
Three rushed her at
once. She screamed, turning, Pulling on a fallen spire. The massive
piece of metal—nearly as big as a building itself—lurched
into the air, spinning at her command. She slammed it into the
Inquisitors like a club, crushing them. She turned, leaving the
enormous iron pillar resting atop their corpses.
Nine. Ten.
Eleven.
The storm broke,
though the mists continued to swirl. The rain let up as Vin walked
across the shattered building, eyes searching for Allomantic blue
lines that were moving. She found one trembling before her, and she
picked up and tossed aside an enormous marble disk. An Inquisitor
groaned beneath; she reached for him, and realized that her hand was
leaking mist. It didn't just swirl around her, it came from her,
smoking forth from the pores in her skin. She breathed out, and mist
puffed before her, then immediately entered the vortex and was pulled
in again.
She grabbed the
Inquisitor, pulling him up. His skin began to heal as he used his
Feruchemical powers, and he struggled, growing stronger. Yet, even
the awesome strength of Feruchemy made little difference against Vin.
She pulled his eye-spikes free, tossed them aside, then left the
corpse slumping in the rubble.
Twelve.
She found the last
Inquisitor huddled in a pool of rainwater. It was Marsh. His body was
broken, and he was missing one of the spikes from his side. The spike
hole was bleeding, but that one apparently wasn't enough to kill him.
He turned his pair of spikeheads to look up at her, expression stiff.
Vin paused,
breathing deeply, feeling rainwater trail down her arms and drip off
her fingers. She still burned within, and she looked up, staring into
the vortex of mists. It was spinning so powerfully, twisting down.
She was having trouble thinking for all the energy that coursed
through her.
She looked down
again.
This isn't
Marsh, she thought. Kelsier's brother is long dead. This is
something else. Ruin.
The mist swirled in
a final tempest, the circular motion growing faster—yet
tighter—as the final wisps of mist spun down and were pulled
into Vin's body.
Then the mists were
gone. Starlight shone above, and flecks of ash fell in the air. The
night landscape was eerie in its stillness, blackness, and clarity.
Even with tin—which let her see at night far better than a
normal person could—the mists had always been there. To see the
night landscape without them was . . . wrong.
Vin began to
tremble. She gasped, feeling the fire within her blaze hotter and
hotter. It was Allomancy as she'd never known it. It felt as if she
had never understood it. The power was far greater than metals, mere
Pushes and Pulls. It was something awesomely more vast. A power that
men had used, yet never comprehended.
She forced her eyes
open. There was one Inquisitor left. She had drawn them to Luthadel,
forced them to expose themselves, laying a trap for someone far more
powerful than herself. And the mists had responded.
It was time to
finish what she had come to do.
Marsh watched
limply as Vin fell to her knees. Shaking, she reached for one of his
eye-spikes.
There was nothing
he could do. He'd used up most of the healing in his metal-mind, and
the rest would do him no good. Stored healing worked by way of speed.
He could either heal himself a small amount very quickly, or wait and
heal himself slowly, yet completely. Either way, he was dead as soon
as Vin pulled those spikes free.
Finally, he
thought with relief as she grabbed the first spike. Whatever I
did . . . it worked. Somehow.
He felt Ruin's
rage, felt his master realizing his mistake. In the end, Marsh had
mattered. In the end, Marsh hadn't given up. He'd done Mare proud.
Vin pulled the
spike free. It hurt, of course—hurt far more than Marsh would
have thought possible. He screamed—both in pain and in joy—as
Vin reached for the other eye-spike.
And then, she
hesitated. Marsh waited expectantly. She shook, then coughed,
cringing. She gritted her teeth, reaching toward him. Her fingers
touched the spike.
And then, Vin
vanished.
She left behind the
misty outline of a young woman. That dissipated and was soon gone,
too, leaving Marsh alone in the wreckage of a palace, head blazing
with pain, body covered in sickly, sodden ash.

She once asked
Ruin why he had chosen her. The primary answer is simple. It had
little to do with her personality, attitudes, or even skill with
Allomancy.
She was simply
the only child Ruin could find who was in a position to gain the
right Hemalurgic spike—one that would grant her heightened
power with bronze, which would then let her sense the location of the
Well of Ascension. She had an insane mother, a sister who was a
Seeker, and was—herself—Mistborn. That was precisely the
combination Ruin needed.
There were
other reasons, of course. But even Ruin didn't know them.





74
DAY BROKE
WITH NO MISTS.
Elend stood atop
the rocky heights in front of Fadrex City, looking out. He felt far
better with a night's rest behind him, though his body ached from
fighting, his arm throbbed where he'd been wounded, and his chest
hurt where he'd carelessly allowed a koloss to punch him. The massive
bruise would have crippled another man.
Koloss corpses
littered the ground before the city, piled particularly high in the
corridor leading into Fadrex itself. The whole area smelled of death
and dried blood. Far more often than Elend would have liked, the
field of blue corpses was broken by the lighter skin of a human.
Still, Fadrex had survived—if only because of the last-minute
addition of several thousand Allomancers and the eventual retreat of
the koloss.
Why did they
leave? Elend wondered, thankful yet frustrated. And, perhaps
more importantly, where are they going?
Elend turned at the
sound of footsteps on rock and saw Yomen climbing the rough-hewn
steps to join him, puffing slightly, still pristine in his
obligator's robes. Nobody had expected him to fight. He was, after
all, a scholar, and not a warrior.
Like me, Elend
thought, smiling wryly.
"The mists are
gone," Yomen said.
Elend nodded. "Both
day and night."
"The skaa fled
inside when the mists vanished. Some still refuse to leave their
homes. For centuries, they feared being out at night because of the
mists. Now the mists disappear, and they find it so unnatural that
they hide again."
Elend turned away,
looking back out. The mists were gone, but the ash still fell. And it
fell hard. The corpses that had fallen during the night hours were
nearly buried.
"Has the sun
always been this hot?" Yomen asked, wiping his brow.
Elend frowned,
noticing for the first time that it did seem hot. It was
still early morning, yet it already felt like noon.
Something is
still wrong, he thought. Very wrong. Worse, even. The
ash choked the air, blowing in the breeze, coating everything. And
the heat . . . shouldn't it have been getting colder as more
ash flew into the air, blocking the sunlight? "Form crews,
Yomen," Elend said. "Have them pick through the bodies and
search for wounded among that mess down there. Then, gather the
people and begin moving them into the storage cavern. Tell the
soldiers to be ready for . . . for something. I don't know what."
Yomen frowned. "You
sound as if you're not going to be here to help me."
Elend turned
eastward. "I won't be."
Vin was still out
there somewhere. He didn't understand why she had said what she had
about the atium, but he trusted her. Perhaps she had intended to
distract Ruin with lies. Elend suspected that somehow, the people of
Fadrex owed her their lives. She'd drawn the koloss away—she'd
figured something out, something that he couldn't even guess at.
She always
complains that she's not a scholar, he thought, smiling to
himself. But that's just because she lacks education. She's twice
as quick-witted as half the "geniuses" I knew during my
days at court.
He couldn't leave
her alone. He needed to find her. Then . . . well, he didn't know
what they'd do next. Find Sazed, perhaps? Either way, Elend could do
no more in Fadrex. He moved to walk down the steps, intending to find
Ham and Cett. However, Yomen caught his shoulder.
Elend turned.
"I was wrong
about you, Venture," Yomen said. "The things I said were
undeserved."
"You let me
into your city when my men were surrounded by their own koloss,"
Elend said. "I don't care what you said about me.
You're a good man in my estimation."
"You're wrong
about the Lord Ruler, though," Yomen said. "He's guiding
this all."
Elend just smiled.
"It doesn't
bother me that you don't believe," Yomen said, reaching up to
his forehead. "I've learned something. The Lord Ruler uses
unbelievers as well as believers. We're all part of his plan. Here."
Yomen pulled the
bead of atium free from its place at his brow. "My last bead. In
case you need it."
Elend accepted the
bit of metal, rolling it over in his fingers. He'd never burned
atium. For years, his family had overseen its mining—but, by
the time Elend himself had become Mistborn, he'd already either spent
what he'd been able to obtain, or had given it to Vin to be burned.
"How did you
do it, Yomen?" he asked. "How did you make it seem you were
an Allomancer?"
"I am
an Allomancer, Venture."
"Not a
Mistborn," Elend said.
"No,"
Yomen said. "A Seer—an atium Misting."
Elend nodded. He'd
assumed that was impossible, but it was hard to rely on assumptions
about anything anymore. "The Lord Ruler knew about your
power?"
Yomen smiled. "Some
secrets, he worked very hard to guard."
Atium Mistings,
Elend thought. That means there are others too . . . gold
Mistings, electrum Mistings . . . Though, as he thought about
it, some—like aluminum Mistings or duralumin Mistings—would
be impossible to find because they couldn't use their metals without
being able to burn other metals.
"Atium was too
valuable to use in testing people for Allomantic powers anyway,"
Yomen said, turning away. "I never really found the power all
that useful. How often does one have both atium and the desire to use
it up in a few heartbeats? Take that bit and go find your wife."
Elend stood for a
moment, then tucked the bead of atium away and went down to give Ham
some instructions. A few minutes later, he was streaking across the
landscape, doing his best to fly with the horseshoes as Vin had
taught him.

Each Hemalurgic
spike driven through a person's body gave Ruin some small ability to
influence them. This was mitigated, however, by the mental fortitude
of the one being controlled .
In most
cases—depending on the size of the spike and the length of time
it had been worn—a single spike gave Ruin only minimal powers
over a person. He could appear to them, and could warp their thoughts
slightly, making them overlook certain oddities—for instance,
their compulsion for keeping and wearing a simple earring .





75
SAZED
GATHERED HIS NOTES, carefully stacking the thin sheets of
metal. Though the metal served an important function in keeping Ruin
from modifying—or perhaps even reading—their contents,
Sazed found them a bit frustrating. The plates were easily scratched,
and they couldn't be folded or bound.
The kandra elders
had given him a place to stay, and it was surprisingly lush for a
cave. Kandra apparently enjoyed human comforts—blankets,
cushions, mattresses. Some even preferred to wear clothing, though
those who didn't declined to create genitals for their True Bodies.
That left him wondering about scholarly sorts of questions. They
reproduced by transforming mistwraiths into kandra, so genitals would
be redundant. Yet, the kandra identified themselves by gender—each
was definitely a "he" or a "she." So, how did
they know? Did they choose arbitrarily, or did they actually know
what they would have been, had they been born human rather than as a
mistwraith?
He wished he had
more time to study their society. So far, everything he'd done in the
Homeland had been focused on learning more of the Hero of Ages and
the Terris religion. He'd made a sheet of notes about what he'd
discovered, and it sat at the top of his metallic stack. It looked
surprisingly, even depressingly, similar to any number of sheets in
his portfolio.
The Terris
religion, as one might have expected, focused heavily on knowledge
and scholarship. The Worldbringers—their word for Keepers—were
holy men and women who imparted knowledge, but also wrote of their
god, Terr. It was the ancient Terris word for "to preserve."
A central focus of the religion had been the histories of how
Preservation—or Terr—and Ruin had interacted, and these
included various prophecies about the Hero of Ages, who was seen as a
successor to Preservation.
Aside from the
prophecies, however, the Worldbringers had taught temperance, faith,
and understanding to their people. They had taught that it was better
to build than to destroy, a principle at the core of their teachings.
Of course there had been rituals, rites, initiations, and traditions.
There were also lesser religious leaders, required offerings, and
codes of conduct. It all seemed good, but hardly original. Even the
focus on scholarship was something shared by several dozen other
religions Sazed had studied.
That, for some
reason, depressed him. It was just another religion.
What had he
expected? Some astounding doctrine that would prove to him once and
for all that there was a god? He felt like a fool. Yet, he also felt
betrayed. This was what he'd ridden across the empire, feeling elated
and anticipatory, to discover? This was what he'd expected to save
them? These were just more words. Pleasant ones, like most in his
portfolio, but hardly compelling. Was he supposed to believe just
because it was the religion his people had followed?
There were no
promises here that Tindwyl still lived. Why was it that people had
followed this, or any, of the religions? Frustrated, Sazed dipped
into his metalminds, dumping a group of accounts into his mind.
Writings the Keepers had discovered—journals, letters, other
sources from which scholars had pieced together what had once been
believed. He looked through them, thought of them, read them.
What had made these
people so willing to accept their religions? Were they simply
products of their society, believing because it was tradition? He
read of their lives, and tried to persuade himself that the people
were simpletons, that they hadn't ever truly questioned their
beliefs. Surely they would have seen the flaws and inconsistencies if
they'd just taken the time to be rational and discerning.
Sazed sat with
closed eyes, a wealth of information from journals and letters in his
mind, searching for what he expected to find. However, as the time
passed, he did not discover what he sought. The people did not seem
like fools to him. As he sat, something began to occur to him.
Something about the words, the feelings, of the people who had
believed.
Before, Sazed had
looked at the doctrines themselves. This time, he found himself
studying the people who had believed, or what he could find of them.
As he read their words over again in his mind, he began to see
something. The faiths he had looked at, they couldn't be divorced
from the people who had adhered to them. In the abstract, those
religions were stale. However, as he read the words of the
people—really read them—he began to see
patterns.
Why did they
believe? Because they saw miracles. Things one man took as chance, a
man of faith took as a sign. A loved one recovering from disease, a
fortunate business deal, a chance meeting with a long lost friend. It
wasn't the grand doctrines or the sweeping ideals that seemed to make
believers out of men. It was the simple magic in the world around
them.
What was it
Spook said? Sazed thought, sitting in the shadowy kandra cavern.
That faith was about trust. Trusting that somebody was watching.
That somebody would make it all right in the end, even though things
looked terrible at the moment .
To believe, it
seemed, one had to want to believe. It was a conundrum, one
Sazed had wrestled with. He wanted someone, something, to force him
to have faith. He wanted to have to believe because of the proof
shown to him.
Yet, the believers
whose words now filled his mind would have said he already had proof.
Had he not, in his moment of despair, received an answer? As he had
been about to give up, TenSoon had spoken. Sazed had begged for a
sign, and received it.
Was it chance? Was
it providence?
In the end,
apparently, it was up to him to decide. He slowly returned the
letters and journals to his metalminds, leaving his specific memory
of them empty—yet retaining the feelings they had prompted in
him. Which would he be? Believer or skeptic? At that moment, neither
seemed a patently foolish path.
I do want
to believe, he thought. That's why I've spent so much time
searching. I can't have it both ways. I simply have to decide .
Which would it be?
He sat for a few moments, thinking, feeling, and—most
important—remembering.
I sought help,
Sazed thought. And something answered .
Sazed smiled, and
everything seemed a little bit brighter. Breeze was right,
he thought, standing and organizing his things as he prepared to go.
I was not meant to be an atheist.
The thought seemed
a little too flippant for what had just happened to him. As he picked
up his metal sheets and prepared to go meet with the First
Generation, he realized that kandra passed outside his humble little
cavern, completely oblivious to the important decision he'd just
made.
But, that was how
things often went, it seemed. Some important decisions were made on a
battlefield or in a conference room. But others happened quietly,
unseen by others. That didn't make the decision any less important to
Sazed. He would believe. Not because something had been proven to him
beyond his ability to deny. But because he chose to.
As, he realized,
Vin had once chosen to believe and trust in the crew. Because of what
Kelsier had taught her. You taught me too, Survivor, Sazed
thought, moving out into the stone tunnel to meet with the kandra
leaders. Thank you.
Sazed made his way
through the cavern corridors, suddenly eager at the prospect of
another day interviewing the members of the First Generation. Now
that he had covered most of their religion, he planned to find out
more about the First Contract.
As far as he knew,
he was the only human other than the Lord Ruler to have ever read its
words. The members of the First Generation treated the metal bearing
the contract with noticeably less reverence than the other kandra.
That had surprised him.
Of course,
Sazed thought, turning a corner, it does make some kind of
sense. To the members of the First Generation, the Lord Ruler was a
friend. They remember climbing that mountain with him—their
leader, yes, but not a god. Kind of like the members of the crew, who
had trouble seeing Kelsier in a religious light .
Still lost in
thought, Sazed wandered into the Trustwarren, whose broad metallic
doors were open. He paused, however, just inside. The First
Generation waited in their alcoves, as was common. They didn't come
down until Sazed closed the doors. Oddly, however, the members of the
Second Generation stood at their lecterns, addressing the crowds of
kandra—who, despite being far more reserved than a similar
group of humans would have been, still displayed an air of anxiety.
". . . does it
mean, KanPaar?" one lesser kandra was asking. "Please, we
are confused. Ask the First Generation."
"We have
spoken of this thing already," said KanPaar, leader of the
Seconds. "There is no need for alarm. Look at you, crowding
together, murmuring and rumormongering as if you were humans!"
Sazed moved up to
one of the younger kandra, who stood gathered outside the doorway to
the Trustwarren. "Please," he whispered. "What is the
source of this concern?"
"The mists,
Holy Worldbringer," the kandra—a female, he
thought—whispered back.
"What of
them?" Sazed asked. "The fact that they are staying later
and later in the day?"
"No," the
kandra girl replied. "The fact that they're gone."
Sazed started.
"What?"
The kandra nodded.
"Nobody noticed it until early this morning. It was still dark
out, and a guard walked by to check one of the exits. He says there
was no mist at all outside, despite it being night! Others went out
too. They all agree."
"This is a
simple matter," KanPaar said to the chamber. "We know that
it was raining last night, and sometimes rain disperses the mists for
a short time. They will return tomorrow."
"But, it's not
raining now," one of the kandra said. "And, it wasn't
raining when TarKavv went out on patrol. There have been mists in the
morning for months now. Where are they?"
"Bah,"
KanPaar said, waving his hand. "You worried when the mists
started staying in the mornings, now you complain that they are gone?
We are kandra. We are eternal—we outwait everything
and anything. We don't gather in rowdy mobs. Go back to what you were
doing. This means nothing."
"No," a
voice whispered into the cavern. Heads turned up, and the entire
group hushed.
"No,"
Haddek—leader of the First Generation—whispered from his
hidden alcove. "This is important. We have been wrong, KanPaar.
Very . . . very wrong. Clear the Trustwarren. Leave only the Keeper
behind. And spread the word. The day of the Resolution may have
come."
This comment only
served to agitate the kandra further. Sazed stood frozen with wonder;
he had never seen such a reaction in the normally calm creatures.
They did as they were told—kandra appeared to be very good at
that—and left the room, but there were whispers and debates.
The Seconds slunk out last, looking humiliated. Sazed watched them
go, thinking about KanPaar's words.
We are
eternal—we outwait everything and anything . Suddenly, the
kandra began to make more sense to Sazed. How easy it would be to
ignore the outside world if one were immortal. They had outlasted so
many problems and predicaments, upheavals and riots, that anything
occurring on the outside must have seemed trivial.
So trivial, in
fact, that it was even possible to ignore the prophecies of one's own
religion as they started to come true. Eventually, the room was
empty, and a pair of beefy members of the Fifth Generation pushed the
doors closed from outside, leaving Sazed alone on the floor of the
room. He waited patiently, arranging his notes on his desk as the
members of the First Generation hobbled out of their hidden
stairwells and joined him on the floor of the Trustwarren.
"Tell me,
Keeper," Haddek said as his brothers seated themselves, "what
do you make of this event?"
"The departure
of the mists?" Sazed asked. "It does seem
portentous—though, admittedly, I cannot give a specific reason
why."
"That is
because there are things we have not yet explained to you,"
Haddek said, looking toward the others. They seemed very troubled.
"Things relating to the First Contract, and the promises of the
kandra."
Sazed readied a
sheet of metal paper. "Please, continue."
"I must ask
that you not record these words," Haddek said.
Sazed paused, then
set down his pen. "Very well—though I warn you. The memory
of a Keeper, even without his metalminds, is very long."
"That cannot
be helped," said one of the others. "We need your counsel,
Keeper. As an outsider."
"As a son,"
another whispered.
"When the
Father made us," Haddek said. "He . . . gave us a charge.
Something different from the First Contract."
"To him, it
was almost an afterthought," one of the others added. "Though
once he mentioned it, he implied it was very important."
"He made us
promise," Haddek said. "Each of us. He told us that
someday, we might be required to remove our Blessings."
"Pull them
from our bodies," one of the others added.
"Kill
ourselves," Haddek said.
The room fell
silent.
"You are
certain this would kill you?" Sazed asked.
"It would
change us back to mistwraiths," Haddek said. "That is the
same thing, essentially."
"The Father
said we would have to do it," another said. "There wasn't a
'might' about it. He said that we would have to make certain the
other kandra knew of this charge."
"We call it
the Resolution," Haddek said. "Each kandra is told of it
when he or she is first birthed. They are given the charge—sworn
and ingrained—to pull their Blessing free, should the First
Generation command it. We have never invoked this charge."
"But you're
considering it now?" Sazed asked, frowning. "I do not
understand. Simply because of the way that the mists are acting?"
"The mists are
the body of Preservation, Keeper," Haddek said. "This is a
very portentous event."
"We have been
listening to our children discuss it all morning," another said.
"And it troubles us. They do not know all the mists represent,
but they are aware of their importance."
"Rashek said
that we'd know," another said. "He told us. 'The day will
come when you have to remove your Blessings. You'll know when it
arrives.' "
Haddek nodded. "He
said that we'd know. And . . . we are very worried."
"How can we
order the deaths of all of our people?" another asked. "The
Resolution has always bothered me."
"Rashek saw
the future," Haddek said, turning. "He held the power of
Preservation and wielded it. He is the only man ever to have done so!
Even this girl of whom the Keeper speaks did not use the
power. Only Rashek! The Father."
"Where, then,
are the mists?" another asked.
The room fell
silent again. Sazed sat, pen held in his hand, yet not writing
anything. He leaned forward. "The mists are the body of
Preservation?"
The others nodded.
"And . . . it
has disappeared?"
Again, a nod.
"Does this not
mean, then, that Preservation has returned?"
"That is
impossible," Haddek said. "Preservation's power remains,
for power cannot be destroyed. His mind, however, was all but
destroyed—for this was the sacrifice he made to imprison Ruin."
"The sliver
remains," another reminded. "The shadow of self."
"Yes,"
Haddek said. "But that is not Preservation, just an image—a
remnant. Now that Ruin has escaped, I think we can assume that even
it has been destroyed."
"I think it is
more," another began. "We could—"
Sazed held up his
hands, getting their attention. "If Preservation has not
returned, then has, perhaps, someone else taken up his power to use
in this fight? Is that not what your teachings say will happen? That
which has been sundered must again begin to find its whole."
Silence.
"Perhaps,"
Haddek said.
Vin, Sazed
thought, growing excited. This is what it means to be the Hero of
Ages! I am right to believe. She can save us!
Sazed took a piece
of metal paper, beginning to scribble down his thoughts. At that
moment, however, the doors to the Trustwarren burst open.
Sazed paused,
turning with a frown. A group of rock-boned Fifth Generationers
clomped into the room, followed by the willowy members of the Second
Generation. Outside, the cavern hallway was empty of its earlier
crowd.
"Take them,"
KanPaar said furtively, pointing.
"What is
this!" Haddek exclaimed.
Sazed sat where he
was, pen held in his fingers. He recognized the urgent, tense posture
in the figures of the Second Generationers. Some looked frightened,
others determined. The Fifth Generationers moved forward quickly,
their movements enhanced by the Blessing of Potency.
"KanPaar!"
Haddek said. "What is this?"
Sazed slowly stood
up. Four Fifth Generationers came over to surround him, bearing
hammers as weapons.
"It's a coup,"
Sazed said.
"You can no
longer lead," KanPaar said to the First Generation. "You
would destroy what we have here, polluting our land with outsiders,
letting the talk of revolutionaries cloud kandra wisdom."
"This is not
the time, KanPaar," Haddek said, the members of the First
Generation crying out as they were prodded and grappled.
"Not the
time?" KanPaar asked angrily. "You spoke of the Resolution!
Have you no idea the panic this has caused? You would destroy
everything we have."
Sazed turned
calmly, looking at KanPaar. Despite his angry tone, the kandra was
smiling slightly through translucent lips.
He had to
strike now, Sazed thought, before the First Generation said
more to the common people—making the Seconds redundant. KanPaar
can stuff them all away somewhere, and then prop up dummies in the
alcoves .
Sazed reached for
his pewtermind. One of the Fifths snapped it away with a too-quick
grab of the hand, and two others took Sazed by the arms. He
struggled, but his kandra captors were inhumanly strong.
"KanPaar!"
Haddek yelled. The First's voice was surprisingly strong. "You
are of the Second Generation—you owe obedience to me. We
created you!"
KanPaar ignored
him, directing his kandra to bind the members of the First
Generation. The other Seconds stood in a cluster behind him, looking
increasingly apprehensive and shocked at what they were doing.
"The time for
the Resolution may indeed be here!" Haddek said. "We must—"
He cut off as one of the Fifths gagged him.
"That is
exactly why I must take leadership," KanPaar said, shaking his
head. "You are too unstable, old one. I will not trust the
future of our people to a creature who could, at a whim, order them
to kill themselves."
"You fear
change," Sazed said, meeting the kandra's eyes.
"I fear
instability," KanPaar said. "I will make certain the kandra
people have a firm and immutable leadership."
"You make the
same argument as many revolutionaries," Sazed said. "And I
can see your concern. However, you must not do this thing.
Your own prophecies are coming to a head. I understand now! Without
the part the kandra are to play, you could inadvertently cause the
end of all things. Let me continue my research—lock us in this
room if you must—but do not—"
"Gag him,"
KanPaar said, turning.
Sazed struggled,
with no success, as his mouth was bound and he was pulled from the
Trustwarren, leaving the atium—the body of a god—behind,
and in the hands of traitors.

I've always
wondered about the strange ability Allomancers have to pierce the
mists. When one burned tin, he or she could see farther at night,
looking through the mists. To the layman, this might seem like a
logical connection—tin, after all, enhances the senses .
The logical
mind, however, may find a puzzle in this ability. How, exactly, would
tin let one see through the mists? As an obstruction, they are
unconnected with the quality of one's eyesight. Both the nearsighted
scholar and the long-sighted scout would have the same trouble seeing
into the distance if there were a wall in the way .
This, then,
should have been our first clue. Allomancers could see through the
mists because the mists were, indeed, composed of the very same power
as Allomancy. Once attuned by burning tin, the Allomancer was almost
part of the mists. And therefore, they became more translucent to him
.





76
VIN . . .
FLOATED. She wasn't asleep, but she didn't quite feel awake
either. She was disoriented, uncertain. Was she still lying in the
broken courtyard of Kredik Shaw? Was she sleeping in her cabin aboard
the narrowboat with Elend? Was she in her palace quarters, back in
Luthadel, the city under siege? Was she in Clubs's shop, worried and
confused by the kindness of this strange new crew?
Was she huddled in
an alleyway, crying, back hurting from another of Reen's beatings?
She felt about her,
trying to make sense of her surroundings. Her arms and legs didn't
seem to work. In fact, she couldn't even really focus on them. The
longer she floated, however, the clearer her vision became. She was .
. . in Luthadel. After killing the Inquisitors.
Why couldn't she
feel anything? She tried to reach down, to push herself to her knees,
but the ground seemed strangely far away. And, she saw no arms in
front of her. She just continued to float.
I'm dead, she
thought.
Even as that
occurred to her, she woke up a bit more. She could see, though it was
as if she looked through a very blurry, distorting pane of glass. She
felt . . . a power buzzing within her. A strength unlike that of
limbs—but somehow more versatile.
She managed to
turn, getting a sweeping view of the city. And, halfway through her
turn, she came face-to-face with something dark.
She couldn't tell
how far away it was. It seemed close and distant at the same time.
She could view it with detail—far more detail than she could
see in the actual world—but she couldn't touch it. She knew,
instinctively, what it was.
Ruin no longer
looked like Reen. Instead, he manifested as a large patch of shifting
black smoke. A thing without a body, but with a consciousness greater
than that of a simple human.
That . . . is
what I've become, Vin realized, thoughts becoming clearer.
Vin, Ruin
spoke. His voice was not that of Reen, but instead something more . .
. guttural. It was a vibration that washed across her, like an
Allomantic pulse.
Welcome, Ruin
said, to godhood .
Vin remained
silent, though she quested out with her power, trying to get a sense
of what she could do. Understanding seemed to open to her. It was
like before, when she'd taken the power at the Well of Ascension. She
immediately knew things. Only this time, the power was so
vast—the understanding so great—that it seemed to have
shocked her mind. Fortunately, that mind was expanding, and she was
growing.
Awakening.
She rose above the
city, knowing that the power spinning through her—the core of
her existence—was simply a hub. A focus for power that
stretched across the entire world. She could be anywhere she wished.
Indeed, a part of her was in all places at once. She could see the
world as a whole.
And it was dying.
She felt its tremors, saw its life ebbing. Already, most of the plant
life on the planet was dead. Animals would go quickly—the ones
who survived were those who could find a way to chew on dead foliage
now covered by ash. Humans would not be far behind, though Vin found
it interesting to note that a surprising percentage of them had found
their way down into one or another of the storage caverns.
Not storage
caverns . . . Vin thought, finally understanding the Lord
Ruler's purpose. Shelters. That's why they're so vast. They're
like fortresses for people to hide in. To wait, to survive a little
longer .
Well, she would fix
that. She felt electrified with power. She reached out and plugged
the ashmounts. She soothed them, deadened them, smothered their
ability to spray ash and lava. Then, she reached into the sky and
wiped the smoke and darkness from the atmosphere—like a maid
wiping soot from a dirty window. She did all of this in a matter of
instants; not more than five minutes would have passed on the world
below.
Immediately, the
land began to burn.
The sun was
amazingly powerful—she hadn't realized how much the ash and
smoke had done to shield the land. She cried out, spinning the world
quickly so that the sun moved to its other side. Darkness fell. And,
as soon as she did that, tempests began to swoop across the
landscape. Weather patterns were disrupted by the motion, and in the
sea a sudden wave appeared, enormously large. It rolled toward the
coast, threatening to wipe away several cities.
Vin cried out
again, reaching to stop the wave. And something blocked her.
She heard laughter.
She turned in the air, looking to where Ruin sat like a shifting,
undulating thundercloud.
Vin, Vin .
. . he said. Do you realize how like the Lord Ruler you are? When
he first took the power, he tried to solve everything. All of man's
ills .
She saw it. She
wasn't omniscient—she couldn't see the entirety of the past.
However, she could see the history of the power she held.
She could see when Rashek had taken it, and she could see him,
frustrated, trying to pull the planet into a proper orbit. Yet, he
pulled it too far, leaving the world cold and freezing. He pushed it
back again, but his power was too vast—too terrible—for
him to control properly at that time. So, he again left the world too
hot. All life would have perished.
He opened the
ashmounts, clogging the atmosphere, turning the sun red. And, in
doing so, he saved the planet—but doomed it as well.
You are so
impetuous, Ruin thought. I have held this power for a period
of time longer than you can imagine. It takes care and precision to
use it correctly .
Unless, of
course, you just want to destroy .
He reached out with
a power Vin could feel. Immediately, without knowing how or why, she
blocked him. She threw her power up against his, and he halted,
unable to act.
Below, the tsunami
crashed into the coast. There were still people down there. People
who had hidden from the koloss, who had survived on fish from the sea
when their crops failed. Vin felt their pain, their terror, and she
cried out as she reached to protect them.
And, again, was
stopped.
Now you know
the frustration, Ruin said as the tsunami destroyed villages.
What was it your Elend said? For every Push, there is a Pull.
Throw something up, and it will come back down. Opposition .
For Ruin, there
is Preservation. Time immemorial! Eternity! And each time I push, YOU
push back. Even when dead, you stopped me, for we are forces. I can
do nothing! And you can do nothing! Balance! The curse of our
existence .
Vin suffered as the
people below were crushed, washed away, and drowned. Please,
she said. Please just let me save them.
Why? Ruin
asked. What is it I told you before? Everything you do serves me.
It is out of kindness that I stop you. For, even if you were to reach
your hand out for them, you would destroy more than you preserve .
That is always
the way it is .
Vin hung, listening
to the screams. And yet, a part of her mind—now so vast, now
capable of many thoughts at once—dissected Ruin's words.
They were untrue.
He said that all things destroyed, yet he complained about balance.
He warned that she would only destroy more, but she could not believe
that he would stop her out of kindness. He wanted her to destroy.
It couldn't be both
ways. She knew herself as his opposite. She could have saved
those people, if he hadn't stopped her. True, she probably didn't
have the accuracy to do it yet. That wasn't the power's fault,
however, but hers. He had to stop her so that she wouldn't learn, as
the Lord Ruler had, and become more capable with the power.
She spun away from
him, moving back toward Luthadel. Her awareness was still expanding,
but she was confused by something she saw. Bright points of light,
dotting the landscape, shining like flares. She drew closer, trying
to figure out what they were. Yet, just as it was difficult to look
directly at a bright lantern and see what was emitting the light, it
was difficult to discern the source of this power.
She figured it out
as she reached Luthadel. A large glow was coming from the broken
palace. Most of the light was shaped vaguely like . . .
Spires. Metal.
That's what caused the glowing power. I was right. Metal
is power, and it's why Ruin couldn't read things written in steel.
Vin turned away from a brightly shining spire. Ruin was there, as
always, watching her.
I was surprised
when Preservation said he wanted to create you, Ruin said, a bit
of curiosity in his voice. Other life is ordered by way of
nature. Balanced. But Preservation . . . he wanted to create
something intentionally unbalanced. Something that could choose to
preserve at times, but to ruin at others. Something in the form of
that which we'd seen before. It was intriguing .
I find it odd
that he expended so much of himself to create you. Why would he
weaken himself, eventually giving me the strength to destroy the
world, simply to place human beings on his world? I know that others
call his death to imprison me a sacrifice, but that wasn't the
sacrifice. His sacrifice came much earlier .
Yes, he still
tried to betray me—to imprison me. But, he could not stop me.
He could only slow me. Forestall. Delay. Since the day we created
you, there has been an imbalance. I was stronger. And he knew it .
Vin frowned—or,
at least, she felt as if she were frowning, though she no longer had
a body. His words . . .
He says he's
stronger, Vin thought. Yet, we are equally matched. Is he
lying again?
No . . . he didn't
lie. Looking back with her ever-expanding mind, she saw that
everything Ruin said, he believed. He truly thought that
whatever she did helped him. He saw the world through the lenses of
destruction.
He wasn't lying
about being more powerful than she. Yet, they were obviously matched
at the moment. Which meant . . .
There's another
piece of Ruin out there, Vin thought. Preservation is
weaker because he gave up a piece of himself to create mankind.
Not his consciousness—that he used to fuel Ruin's prison—but
an actual bit of his power .
What she had
suspected before, she now knew with certainty. Ruin's power was
concentrated, hidden somewhere by Preservation. The atium.
Ruin was stronger. Or, he would be, once he recovered the
last part of his self. Then, he would be able to destroy
completely—they would no longer be balanced.
She swung about in
frustration, a glowing white aura of mist with wispy tendrils
expanding across the entire world. There's so much I still don't
know, Vin thought.
It was an odd thing
to acknowledge, with her mind broadening to include so much. Yet, her
ignorance was no longer that of a person. Her ignorance was related
to experience. Ruin had such a huge head start on her. He had created
for himself servants who could act without his direction, and so she
could not block them.
She saw his
planning manifest in the world. She saw him subtly influencing the
Lord Ruler a thousand years ago. Even while Rashek held the power of
Preservation, Ruin had whispered in his ear, directing him toward an
understanding of Hemalurgy. And, Rashek had obeyed without realizing
it, creating minions—armies—for Ruin to take when the
time was right.
Vin could see
them—the koloss—converging toward Luthadel.
I will give you
credit, Vin, Ruin said, hovering nearby. You destroyed my
Inquisitors. All but one, at least. They were very difficult to make.
I . . .
She stopped
focusing on him, at least with most of her mind. Something else drew
her attention. Something moving into Luthadel, flying on spears of
light.
Elend.

Looking back,
we should have been able to see the connection between the mists,
Allomancy, and the power at the Well of Ascension. Not only could
Allomancers' vision pierce the mists, but there was the fact that the
mists swirled slightly around the body of a person using any kind of
Allomancy .
More telling,
perhaps, was the fact that when a Hemalurgist used his abilities, it
drove the mists away. The closer one came to Ruin, the more under his
influence, and the longer one bore his spikes, the more the mists
were repelled .





77
ELEND STOOD
IN THE RUBBLE of Kredik Shaw, mind numb as he contemplated
the destruction.
It seemed . . .
impossible. What force could have leveled such an enormous, majestic
building? What could have caused such destruction, breaking apart
buildings and flinging rubble several streets away? And, all of the
destruction was focused here, at what had once been the center of the
Lord Ruler's power.
Elend skidded down
some rubble, approaching the center of what looked like an impact
crater. He turned around in the dark night, looking at the fallen
blocks and spires.
"Lord Ruler .
. ." he swore quietly, unable to help himself. Had something
happened at the Well of Ascension? Had it exploded?
Elend turned,
looking across his city. It appeared to be empty. Luthadel, largest
metropolis in the Final Empire, seat of his government. Empty. Much
of it in ruins, a good third of it burned, and Kredik Shaw itself
flattened as if it had been pounded by the fist of a god.
Elend dropped a
coin and shot away, heading along his original path toward the
northeastern section of the city. He'd come to Luthadel hoping to
find Vin, but had been forced to take a slight detour to the south in
order to get around a particularly large swath of lava burning the
plains around Mount Tyrian. That sight, along with the sight of
Luthadel in ruin, left him very disturbed.
Where was Vin?
He jumped from
building to building. He kicked up ash with each leap. Things were
happening. The ash was slowly trickling away—in fact, it had
mostly stopped falling. That was good, but he remembered well a short
time ago when the sun had suddenly blazed with an amazing intensity.
Those few moments had burned him so that his face still hurt.
Then, the sun had .
. . dropped. It had fallen below the horizon in less than a second,
the ground lurching beneath Elend's feet. Part of him assumed that he
was going mad. Yet, he could not deny that it was now nighttime, even
if his body—and one of the city clocks he had visited—indicated
that it should have been afternoon.
He landed on a
building, then jumped off, Pushing against a broken door handle. He
shivered as he moved in the open air of darkness. It was night—the
stars blazing uncomfortably above—and there was no mist. Vin
had told him that the mists would protect him. What would protect him
now that they were gone?
He made his way to
Keep Venture, his palace. He found the building to be a burned-out
husk. He landed in the courtyard, staring up at his home—the
place he had been raised—trying to make sense of the
destruction. Several guards in the brown colors of his livery lay
decomposing on the cobblestones. All was still.
What in the
hell happened here? he thought with frustration. He poked
through the building, but found no clues. All had been burned. He
left via a broken window on the top floor, then paused at something
he saw in the rear courtyard.
He dropped to the
ground. And there, beneath a patio canopy that had kept off much of
the ash, he found a corpse in a fine gentlemen's suit lying on the
cobbles. Elend rolled it over, noting the sword thrust through its
stomach and the posture of a suicide. The corpse's fingers still held
the weapon. Penrod, he thought, recognizing the face. Dead,
presumably, by his own hand.
Something lay
scrawled in charcoal on the patio floor. Elend wiped away the drifted
ash, smudging the letters in the process. Fortunately, he could still
read them. I'm sorry, it read. Something has taken
control of me . . . of this city. I am lucid only part of the time.
Better to kill myself than to cause more destruction. Look toward the
Terris Dominance for your people.
Elend turned toward
the north. Terris? That seemed like a very odd place in which to seek
refuge. If the people of the city had fled, then why would they have
left the Central Dominance, the place where the mists were the
weakest?
He eyed the
scribbles.
Ruin . . .
a voice seemed to whisper. Lies . . .
Ruin could change
text. Words like Penrod's couldn't be trusted. Elend bid a silent
farewell to the corpse, wishing he had the time to bury the old
statesman, then dropped a coin to Push himself into the air.
The people of
Luthadel had gone somewhere. If Ruin had found a way to kill
them, then Elend would have found more corpses. He suspected that if
he took the time to search, he could probably find people still
hiding in the city. Likely, the disappearance of the mists—then
the sudden change from day to night—had driven them into
hiding. Perhaps they had made it to the storage cavern beneath Kredik
Shaw. Elend hoped that not many had gone there, considering the
damage that had been done to the palace. If there were people there,
they would be sealed in.
West . . .
the wind seemed to whisper. Pits . . .
Ruin usually
changes text so that it's very similar to what it said before, Elend
thought. So . . . Penrod probably did write most of those words,
trying to tell me where to go to find my people. Ruin made it sound
like they went to the Terris Dominance, but what if Penrod originally
wrote that they went to the Terris people?
It made good sense.
If he'd fled Luthadel, he would have gone there—it was a place
where there was already an established group of refugees, a group
with herds, crops, and food.
Elend turned west,
leaving the city, cloak flapping with each Allomantic bound.
Suddenly, Ruin's
frustration made even more sense to Vin. She felt she held the power
of all creation. Yet, it took everything she had to get even a few
words to Elend.
She wasn't even
certain if he'd heard her or not. She knew him so well, however, that
she felt a . . . connection. Despite Ruin's efforts to block her, she
felt as if some part of her had been able to get through to some part
of Elend. Perhaps in the same way Ruin was able to communicate with
his Inquisitors and followers?
Still, her
near-impotence was infuriating.
Balance, Ruin
spat. Balance imprisoned me. Preservation's sacrifice—that
was to siphon off the part of me that was stronger, to lock it away,
to leave me equal with him again. For a time .
Only for a
time. And what is time to us, Vin?
Nothing .

It may seem odd
to those reading this that atium was part of the body of a god.
However, it is necessary to understand that when we said "body"
we generally meant "power." As my mind has expanded, I've
come to realize that objects and energy are actually composed of the
very same things, and can change state from one to another. It makes
perfect sense to me that the power of godhood would be manifest
within the world in physical form. Ruin and Preservation were not
nebulous abstractions. They were integral parts of existence. In a
way, every object that existed in the world was composed of their
power .
Atium, then,
was an object that was one-sided. Instead of being composed of half
Ruin and half Preservation—as, say, a rock would be—atium
was completely of Ruin. The Pits of Hathsin were crafted by
Preservation as a place to hide the chunk of Ruin's body that he had
stolen away during the betrayal and imprisonment. Kelsier didn't
truly destroy this place by shattering those crystals, for they would
have regrown eventually—in a few hundred years—and
continued to deposit atium, as the place was a natural outlet for
Ruin's trapped power .
When people
burned atium, then, they were drawing upon the power of Ruin—which
is, perhaps, why atium turned people into such efficient killing
machines. They didn't use up this power, however, but simply made use
of it. Once a nugget of atium was expended, the power would return to
the Pits and begin to coalesce again—just as the power at the
Well of Ascension would return there again after it had been used .





78
THIS IS ,
SAZED THOUGHT, without a doubt, the oddest dungeon I
have ever been in .
Granted, it was
only the second time he had been imprisoned. Still, he had observed
several prisons in his lifetime, and had read of others. Most were
like cages. This one, however, consisted only of a hole in the ground
with an iron grate covering the top. Sazed scrunched down inside of
it, stripped of his metalminds, his legs cramped.
It was probably
built for a kandra, he thought. One without bones, perhaps?
What would a kandra without bones be like? A pile of goo? Or,
perhaps, a pile of muscles?
Either way, this
prison had not been meant to hold a man—particularly not one as
tall as Sazed. He could barely move. He reached up, pushing against
the grate, but it was secure. A large lock held it in place.
He wasn't certain
how long he had been in the pit. Hours? Perhaps even days. They still
hadn't given him anything to eat, though a member of the Third
Generation had poured some water on him. Sazed was still wet with it,
and he had taken to sucking on the cloth of his robes to assuage his
thirst.
This is silly,
he thought, not for the first time. The world is ending, and
I'm in prison? He was the final Keeper, the Announcer. He should
be up above, recording events.
Because, truth be
told, he was beginning to believe that the world would not end. He
had accepted that something, perhaps Preservation itself, was
watching over and protecting mankind. He was more and more determined
to follow the Terris religion—not because it was perfect, but
because he would rather believe and have hope.
The Hero was
real. Sazed believed that. And he had faith in her.
He had lived with
Kelsier and had helped the man. He had chronicled the rise of the
Church of the Survivor during the first years of its development. He
had even researched the Hero of Ages with Tindwyl and taken it upon
himself to announce Vin as the one who fulfilled the prophecies. But
it was only recently that he'd started to have faith in her. Perhaps
it was his decision to be someone who saw miracles. Perhaps it was
the daunting fear of the ending that seemed to loom just ahead.
Perhaps it was the tension and anxiety. Regardless, somehow, from the
chaos, he drew peace.
She would come. She
would preserve the world. However, Sazed needed to be ready to help.
And that meant escaping.
He eyed the metal
grate. The lock was of fine steel, the grate itself of iron. He
reached up tentatively, touching the bars, draining a bit of his
weight and putting it into the iron. Immediately, his body grew
lighter. In Feruchemy, iron stored physical weight, and the grate was
pure enough to hold a Feruchemical charge. It went against his
instincts to use the grate as a metalmind—it wasn't portable,
and if he had to flee, he'd leave behind all of the power he'd saved.
Yet, what good would it be to simply sit in the pit and wait?
He reached up with
the other hand, touching the steel lock with one finger. Then, he
began to fill it as well, draining his body of speed. He instantly
began to feel lethargic, as if his every motion—even his
breathing—was more difficult. It was like he had to push
through some thick substance each time he moved.
He stayed that way.
He had learned to enter a kind of meditative trance when he filled
metalminds. Often, he would fill many at once, leaving himself
sickly, weak, slow, and dull-minded. When he could, it was better to
simply . . .
Drift.
He wasn't certain
how long the meditation lasted. Occasionally, the guard came to pour
water on him. When the sounds came, Sazed would let go and huddle
down, pretending to sleep. But, as soon as the guard withdrew, he
would reach back up and continue to fill the metalminds.
More time passed.
Then, he heard sounds. Sazed huddled down again, then waited
expectantly for the shower of water.
"When I sent
you back to save my people," a voice growled, "this wasn't
exactly what I had in mind."
Sazed popped his
eyes open, glancing upward, and was surprised to see a canine face
looking through the grate. "TenSoon?" Sazed asked.
The kandra grunted
and stepped back. Sazed perked up as another kandra appeared. She
wore a delicate True Body made of wood, willowy and almost inhuman.
And, she held some keys.
"Quickly,
MeLaan," TenSoon growled with his dog's voice. He had apparently
switched back to the wolfhound, which made sense. Moving as a horse
through the sometimes steep and narrow tunnels of the Homeland would
have been difficult.
The female kandra
unlocked the grate, then pulled it back. Sazed eagerly climbed free.
In the room, he found several other kandra wearing deviant True
Bodies. In the corner, the prison guard lay bound and gagged.
"I was seen
entering the Homeland, Terrisman," TenSoon said. "So we
have little time. What has happened here? MeLaan told me of your
imprisonment—KanPaar announced that the First Generation had
ordered you taken. What did you do to antagonize them?"
"Not them,"
Sazed said, stretching his cramped legs. "It was the Second
Generation. They have taken the Firsts captive, and plan to rule in
their stead."
The
girl—MeLaan—gasped. "They would never!"
"They did,"
Sazed said, standing. "I fear for the safety of the Firsts.
KanPaar may have been afraid to kill me because I am human. However,
the Firsts . . ."
"But,"
MeLaan said, "the Seconds are kandra. They wouldn't do something
like that! We're not that kind of people."
TenSoon and Sazed
shared a look. All societies have people who break the rules,
child, Sazed thought. Particularly when power is concerned.
"We have to
find the Firsts," TenSoon said. "And recover the
Trustwarren."
"We will fight
with you, TenSoon," one of the other kandra said.
"We're finally
throwing them off!" another said. "The Seconds, and their
insistence that we serve the humans!"
Sazed frowned at
this. What did humans have to do with this conflict? Then, however,
he noticed how the others regarded TenSoon. The dog's body,
he realized. To them, TenSoon is a revolutionary of the highest
order—all because of something Vin ordered him to do.
TenSoon met Sazed
eyes again, opening his mouth to speak. Then, however, he paused.
"They're coming," he said with a curse, his dog's ears
flattening.
Sazed spun with
concern, noticing shadows on the rock wall of the corridor leading
into the prison chamber. The chamber was small, with six or so pit
cells in the floor. There were no other entrances.
Despite their brave
words, TenSoon's companions immediately shied back, huddling against
the wall. They were obviously not accustomed to conflict,
particularly with their own kind. TenSoon shared none of their
timidity. He charged forward as soon as the group of Fifths entered
the room, ramming his shoulder into one's chest, howling and clawing
at another.
There is a
kandra who fits in with his people as poorly as I do with my own,
Sazed thought, smiling. He stepped backward, moving up onto the
top of the prison grate, touching its metals with his bare feet.
The Fifths had
trouble fighting TenSoon—he had trained with Vin, and was
apparently quite confident in his dog's body. He kept moving,
knocking them over. However, there were five of them, and only one
TenSoon. He was forced to retreat.
The wounds in
his body close as he orders them, Sazed noticed. That must
be why the guards usually carry hammers .
Which made it
fairly obvious how one had to fight kandra. TenSoon backed up beside
Sazed. "I apologize," the dog growled. "This isn't
much of a rescue."
"Oh, I don't
know," Sazed said with a smile, the Fifths surrounding them.
"You needn't give up so quickly, I think."
The Fifths charged,
and Sazed tapped iron from the grate beneath his bare feet.
Immediately, his body grew several times heavier than normal, and he
grabbed a kandra guard by the arms.
Then fell on him.
Sazed always said
he wasn't a warrior. However, the number of times he'd said that,
then been forced to fight anyway, made him think he was losing that
excuse. The truth was, he'd been in far more battles over the last
few years than he felt he had any right to have survived.
Either way, he knew
some rudimentary moves—and, with both Feruchemy and surprise to
aid him, that was about all he needed. Tapping weight increased the
density of his body and of his bones, keeping him from damaging
himself as he collapsed on top of the soldier. Sazed felt a
satisfying crack as they hit the grate, Sazed's greatly increased
weight crushing the kandra guard's bones. They used stone True
Bodies, but even that wasn't enough.
Sazed released the
metalmind, then began to fill it instead, making his body incredibly
light. He touched his foot to the steel lock, and tapped speed.
Suddenly, he was faster than any man had a right to be. He stood up
even as the other four guards turned toward him in surprise.
He stopped filling
his ironmind, regaining normal weight, then reached with a blurring
speed to pick up the hammer of the fallen soldier. He didn't have
enhanced strength, but he had speed. He slammed the hammer down on a
kandra shoulder, growing heavier to add to the momentum of his blow.
The kandra's bones
shattered. Sazed snapped his foot on the lock and tapped all of the
remaining speed. He crouched, pivoting, and slammed his hammer into
the knees of two kandra who were trying to attack him with their own
hammers.
They cried out,
falling, as Sazed's speed ran out.
He stood up
straight. TenSoon was sitting atop the final guard, pinning him to
the ground. "I thought you were a scholar," the dog noted,
his captive squirming.
Sazed tossed aside
the hammer. "I am," he said. "Vin would have fought
her way free from this prison days ago. Now, I believe we should deal
with these . . ." He waved toward the fallen Fifths, who seemed
to have quite a bit of trouble moving with their bones broken.
TenSoon nodded. He
motioned for some of his friends to help him with the one he was
sitting on. They held the captive tentatively, but there were enough
of them to keep the prisoner still.
"What have you
done here, FhorKood?" TenSoon demanded of the captive. Sazed
kept an eye on the other Fifths, and was forced to slam a mallet
against one of them, breaking more bones as he tried to sneak away.
FhorKood spat.
"Dirty Third," he muttered.
"You
are the traitor this time," TenSoon said, smiling slightly.
"KanPaar brands me a Contract-breaker, then he overthrows the
First Generation? If the world weren't ending, I'd find that far more
amusing. Now, speak!"
Sazed paused as he
noticed something. The other cells in the floor were occupied. He
leaned down, recognizing something about the muscles he saw inside.
They were . . . discolored, and a bit deformed. Like . . . hanging
moss.
"TenSoon!"
he said, looking up. "Perhaps the First Generation is
still alive. Come here."
TenSoon moved over,
then looked down at the pit, frowning with canine lips. "MeLaan!
The keys!"
She rushed over,
unlocking the grate. With some consternation, Sazed was able to
determine that there were multiple sets of squirming muscles in the
pit, each of a slightly different color.
"We need
bones," TenSoon said, standing.
MeLaan nodded,
rushing from the room. Sazed shared a look with TenSoon.
"They must
have killed the other kandra in these cells," TenSoon said
softly. "Traitors to our kind, imprisoned endlessly. It was to
have been my fate. Either way, it is clever—everyone thinks
that these cells hold dire criminals. It wouldn't be odd for the
Fifths to continue feeding them, and nobody would suspect that the
occupants had been replaced with the First Generation, assuming they
didn't look too closely at the color of the muscles."
"We need to
keep moving," Sazed said. "Get to KanPaar."
TenSoon shook his
head. "We won't get far without the Firsts to tell our story,
Terrisman. Go and store more of your Feruchemy. We may need it."
With that, TenSoon
moved over, crouching over to their captive. "You have two
options, FhorKood," he said. "Either relinquish those
bones, or I'll digest your body and kill you, as I did OreSeur."
Sazed frowned,
watching. The captured kandra seemed terrified of TenSoon. The
Fifth's body liquefied, and he moved slug-like away from the granite
bones. TenSoon smiled.
"What is that
for?" Sazed asked.
"Something
Zane taught me," TenSoon said, his dog's body beginning to melt,
the hair falling out. "Nobody expects a kandra to be an
impostor. In a few moments, FhorKood here will return to the Second
Generation and tell them that the traitor TenSoon has been captured.
I should be able to stall long enough for the Firsts to
regenerate—they will take far longer than I do to make bodies."
Sazed nodded.
MeLaan returned a short time later with a large sack full of bones,
and TenSoon—having re-created FhorKood's body with incredible
speed—moved out of the chamber on his mission.
Then, Sazed sat
down, removing the lock and holding it to use as a metalmind, using
an iron hammer in the other hand to store weight. It felt odd to just
sit there, but apparently the Firsts would need a few hours to
regenerate their bodies.
There really
isn't a rush, is there? Sazed thought. I have the First
Generation here—they're the ones I needed. I can continue to
question them, learn what I want. TenSoon will have KanPaar
distracted. It doesn't matter that the Seconds will be in charge for
a few more hours .
What harm could
they possibly do?

I believe that
the mists were searching for someone to become a new host for them.
The power needed a consciousness to direct it. In this matter, I am
still rather confused. Why would power used to create and destroy
need a mind to oversee it? And yet, it seems to have only a vague
will of its own, tied in to the mandate of its abilities. Without a
consciousness to direct it, nothing could actually be created or
destroyed. It's as if the power of Preservation understands that its
tendency to reinforce stability is not enough. If nothing changed,
nothing would ever come to exist .
That makes me
wonder who or what the minds of Preservation and Ruin were .
Regardless, the
mists—the power of Preservation—chose someone to become
their host long before all of this happened. That someone, however,
was immediately seized by Ruin and used as a pawn. He must have known
that by giving her a disguised Hemalurgic spike, he would keep the
mists from investing themselves in her as they wished .
The three times
she drew upon their power, then, were the three times when her
earring had been removed from her body. When she had fought the Lord
Ruler, his Allomancy had ripped it free. When fighting Marsh in
Fadrex, she had used the earring as a weapon. And, at the end, Marsh
ripped it out, freeing her and allowing the mists—which were
now desperate for a host, since Preservation's last wisp was gone—to
finally pour themselves into her .





79
SOMETHING
CHANGED.
Vin arose from her
contemplation of the world. Something important was happening. She
didn't have enough experience to tell what it was immediately, but
she did see Ruin's nexus suddenly shoot away.
She followed. Speed
wasn't an issue. In fact, she didn't even really feel like she was
moving. She "followed" because that was how her mind
interpreted the experience of instantly moving her consciousness to
the place where Ruin had focused his.
She recognized the
area. The Pits of Hathsin, or a place nearby. As a portion of her
mind had noticed earlier, the Pits themselves had become a massive
refugee camp, the people there quickly consuming the resources that
the Terris people had carefully stored. A part of her smiled. The
Terris gave of their goods freely, helping those who had fled
Luthadel. The Lord Ruler had worked to breed the Terris so they were
docile. However, had he expected that in making his perfect servants,
he would also create a thoughtful, kindly people who would give of
their last flocks to help those who were starving?
The thing that
she'd noticed earlier didn't have to do with the Terris or their
guests. She saw it as she drew closer. A shining blaze of . . .
something. Powerful, more mighty than the sun itself to her eyes. She
focused on it, but could see little. What could shine so
magnificently?
"Take this,"
a voice said. "Find humans, and trade for weapons and supplies."
"Yes, Lord
KanPaar," a second voice said. They were coming from the center
of the shining area. It was to the side of the Pits, only a few
minutes' travel from the refugees.
Oh, no . .
. Vin thought, feeling a sudden dread.
"The foolish
Firsts have sat on this treasure for far too long," KanPaar
said. "With these riches, we could be ruling, not
serving, mankind."
"I . . .
thought we didn't want to change things?" the second voice said.
"Oh, we won't.
Not quickly, at least. For now, just this small amount needs to be
sold . . ."
Hidden beneath
the ground, Vin thought, heightened mind making the connections.
In a place that already shines because of the large number of
metal deposits. Ruin would never have been able to know where the
atium was .
The depth of the
Lord Ruler's strategies amazed her. He had held on for a thousand
years, maintaining such an amazing secret, keeping atium safe. She
imagined obligators communicating only on metal plates, giving
instructions for the operations at the Pits. She imagined caravans
traveling from the Pits, carrying atium mixed with gold and coins to
hide where it was moving and what exactly was going on.
You don't know
what I do for mankind, the Lord Ruler had said.
And I didn't,
Vin thought. Thank you .
She felt Ruin surge
with power, and she blocked him. But just as she had been able to get
a tendril of power past Ruin to Elend, Ruin was able to get the
tiniest thread through. It was enough, for the one who had spoken was
tainted with Hemalurgy. A spike in each shoulder drew Ruin's power
and allowed him to speak to their bearer.
A kandra? Vin
thought, her senses finally managing to peer through the atium glare
to see a creature with a translucent body standing in a cavern, just
beneath the ground. Another kandra was crawling out of a hole nearby,
carrying a small pouch of atium.
Ruin seized control
of the kandra KanPaar. The creature stiffened, his metal spikes
betraying him.
Speak of this,
Ruin said to KanPaar, Vin feeling his words as they pulsed into
the kandra. How much atium is there?
"Wha . . . who
are you?" KanPaar said. "Why are you in my head?"
I am God, the
voice said. And you are mine .
All of you are
mine .
Elend landed
outside the Pits of Hathsin, throwing up a puff of ash. Oddly, some
of his own soldiers were there, guarding the perimeter. They rushed
forward, spears held anxiously, then froze when they recognized him.
"Lord
Venture?" one of the men asked with shock.
"I know you,"
Elend said, frowning. "From my army at Fadrex."
"You sent us
back, my lord," the other soldier said. "With General
Demoux. To help Lord Penrod in Luthadel."
Elend glanced up at
the night sky, speckled with stars. Some time had passed during his
travel to the Pits from Luthadel. If time were now passing normally,
the night was halfway through. What would happen when the sun rose
again?
"Quickly,"
Elend said. "I need to speak with the leaders of this camp."
The return of the
First Generation was accomplished with as much flair as Sazed had
hoped. The old kandra, now wearing larger bodies, still bore the
distinctive colorings and aged skin of their generation. He had
feared that the ordinary kandra would not recognize them. However, he
hadn't counted on the long life spans of the kandra people. Even if
the Firsts only emerged once every century, most of the kandra would
have seen them several times.
Sazed smiled as the
group of Firsts moved into the main kandra chamber, continuing to
cause shock and surprise in the others. They proclaimed KanPaar had
betrayed them and imprisoned them, then called the kandra people to
assemble. Sazed stayed back behind MeLaan and the others, watching
for snags in their plan.
To the side, he saw
a familiar kandra approaching.
"Keeper,"
TenSoon said, still wearing the body of a Fifth. "We need to be
careful. There are strange things afoot."
"Such as?"
Sazed asked.
Then, TenSoon
attacked him.
Sazed started, and
his moment of confusion cost him dearly. TenSoon—or whoever it
was—got his hands around Sazed's throat and began to choke him.
They fell backward, drawing the attention of the surrounding kandra.
Sazed's assailant—bearing bones of rock—weighed far more
than Sazed, and was easily able to roll to the top, his hands still
on Sazed's neck.
"TenSoon?"
MeLaan asked, sounding terrified.
It's not him,
Sazed thought. It can't be . . . .
"Keeper,"
his assailant said between clenched teeth. "Something is very
wrong."
You're telling
me! Sazed tried to gasp for breath, reaching toward the pocket
of his robe, struggling to grab the metalmind lock inside.
"I can barely
keep myself from crushing your throat right now," the kandra
continued. "Something has control of me. It wants me to kill
you."
You're doing a
pretty good job! Sazed thought.
"I'm sorry,"
TenSoon said.
The Firsts had
gathered around them. Sazed was barely able to focus, panic
controlling him as he fought a much stronger, much heavier foe. He
grabbed hold of his impromptu steelmind, but only then realized that
speed would do him little good when he was being held so tightly.
"It has come,
then," whispered Haddek, leader of the Firsts. Sazed barely
noticed as one of the other Firsts began to shake. People were crying
out but the blood thumping in Sazed's ears kept him from hearing what
they were saying.
Haddek turned away
from the gasping Sazed. And then, in a loud voice, yelled something.
"The Resolution has come!"
Above him, TenSoon
jerked. Something within the kandra seemed to be fighting—tradition
and a lifetime of training warred against the control of an outside
force. TenSoon released Sazed with one hand, but kept choking him
with the other. Then, with his free hand, the kandra reached toward
his own shoulder.
Sazed blacked out.

The kandra
people always said they were of Preservation, while the koloss and
Inquisitors were of Ruin. Yet, the kandra bore Hemalurgic spikes,
just like the others. Was their claim, then, simple delusion?
No, I think
not. They were created by the Lord Ruler to be spies. When they said
such things, most of us interpreted that as meaning he planned to use
them as spies in his new government, because of their ability to
imitate other people. Indeed, they were used for this purpose .
But I see
something much more grand in their existence. They were the Lord
Ruler's double agents, planted with Hemalurgic spikes, yet
trusted—taught, bound—to pull them free when Ruin tried
to seize them. In Ruin's moment of triumph, when he'd always assumed
the kandra would be his on a whim, the vast majority of them
immediately switched sides and left him unable to seize his prize .
They were
of Preservation all along .





80
"THE
TERRISMEN DID A GOOD job with this place, my lord,"
Demoux said.
Elend nodded,
walking through the quiet nighttime camp with hands clasped behind
his back. He was glad he'd stopped to change into a fresh white
uniform before leaving Fadrex. As it was supposed to, the clothing
attracted attention. The people seemed to take hope simply from
seeing him. Their lives had been cast into chaos—they needed to
know that their leader was aware of their situation.
"The camp is
enormous, as you can see," Demoux continued. "Several
hundred thousand people now live here. Without the Terrismen, I doubt
that the refugees would have survived. As it is, they managed to keep
sickness to a minimum, to organize crews to filter and bring fresh
water to the camp, and to distribute food and blankets."
Demoux hesitated,
glancing at Elend. "Food is running out, however," the
general said quietly. Apparently, when he'd discovered that Penrod
was dead and that most of Luthadel's population was at the Pits, he
decided to keep his men there to help.
They passed another
campfire, and the people there rose. They watched Elend and his
general with hope. At this campfire, Demoux stopped as a young
Terris-woman approached and handed him and Elend some warm tea to
drink. Her eyes lingered fondly on Demoux, and he thanked her by
name. The Terris people were affectionate toward Demoux—they
were thankful to him for bringing soldiers to help organize and
police the mass of refugees.
The people needed
leadership and order in these times. "I shouldn't have left
Luthadel," Elend said quietly.
Demoux didn't
respond immediately. The two of them finished their tea, then
continued on, walking with an honor guard of about ten soldiers, all
from Demoux's group. The general had sent several messengers back to
Elend. They had never arrived. Perhaps they hadn't been able to get
around the lava field. Or perhaps they had run afoul of the very same
army of koloss Elend had passed on his way to Luthadel.
Those koloss .
. . Elend thought. The ones we drove away from Fadrex, plus more,
are coming directly in this direction. There are even more people
here than there were in Fadrex. And they don't have a city wall, or
many soldiers at all, to protect them .
"Have you been
able to figure out what happened in Luthadel, Demoux?" Elend
asked quietly, pausing in a darkened area between campfires. It still
felt so strange to be out with no mists to obscure the night. He
could see so much further—yet, oddly, the night didn't seem as
bright.
"Penrod, my
lord," Demoux said softly. "They say he went mad. He began
finding traitors in the nobility, even within his own army. He
divided the city, and it turned into another house war. Almost all of
the soldiers killed one another, and the city half burned down. The
majority of the people escaped, but they have very little by way of
protection. A determined group of bandits could probably wreak havoc
on this whole group."
Elend fell silent.
House war, he thought with frustration. Ruin, using our
own tricks against us. That's the same method Kelsier used to seize
the city.
"My lord . .
." Demoux said tentatively.
"Speak,"
Elend said.
"You were
right to send me and my men back," Demoux said. "The
Survivor is behind this, my lord. He wanted us here for some reason."
Elend frowned.
"What makes you say that?"
"These
people," Demoux said, "they fled Luthadel because of
Kelsier. He appeared to a pair of soldiers, then a group of people,
in the city. They say he'd told them to be ready for disaster, and to
lead the people out of the city. It's because of them that so many
escaped. Those two soldiers and their friends had supplies prepared,
and they had the presence of mind to come here."
Elend's frown
deepened. Yet, he had seen too much to reject even such a strange
story. "Send for these men," he said.
Demoux nodded,
waving for a soldier.
"Also,"
Elend said, remembering that Demoux and his men had been sick from
the mists, "see if anyone here has any Allomantic metals. Pass
them out to your soldiers and have them ingest them."
"My lord?"
Demoux said, confused, as he turned.
"It's a long
story, Demoux," Elend said. "Suffice it to say that your
god—or somebody—has made you and your men into
Allomancers. Divide your men by the metal it turns out they can burn.
We're going to need all of the Coinshots, Thugs, and Lurchers we can
get."
Sazed's eyes
fluttered open, and he shook his head, groaning. How long had he been
out? Probably not long, he realized, as his vision cleared. He'd
passed out from lack of air. That kind of thing usually only left one
unconscious for a short time.
Assuming one woke
up at all.
Which I did, he
thought, coughing and rubbing his throat, sitting up. The kandra
cavern glowed with the quiet light of its blue phosphorescent
lanterns. By that light, he could see that he was surrounded by
something strange.
Mistwraiths. The
cousins of the kandra, the scavengers that hunted at night and fed on
corpses. They moved about Sazed, masses of muscle, flesh, and
bone—but with those bones combined in strange, unnatural ways.
Feet hanging off at angles, heads connected to arms. Ribs used like
legs.
Except, these bones
were not actually bone at all, but stone, metal, or wood. Sazed stood
up solemnly as he looked over the remnants of the kandra people.
Littered across the floor, among the jumbled mass of mistwraiths—who
oozed about like giant, translucent slugs—were discarded
spikes. Kandra Blessings. The things that had brought them sentience.
They had done it.
They had held to their oath, and had removed their spikes rather than
be taken over by Ruin. Sazed looked over them with pity, amazement,
and respect.
The atium, he
thought. They did this to stop Ruin from getting the atium. I
have to protect it!
He stumbled away
from the main chamber, regaining his strength as he made his way to
the Trustwarren. He paused, however, as he approached, noticing
sounds. He peeked around a corner, and looked down the corridor
through the open Trustwarren doorway. Inside, he found a group of
kandra—perhaps twenty in number—working to push back the
plate on the floor that covered the atium.
Of course they
didn't all become mistwraiths, he thought. Some would have been
outside of the hearing of the Firsts, or wouldn't have had the
courage to pull their spikes free. In fact, as he thought about it,
he was even more impressed that so many had obeyed the
command from the First Generation.
Sazed easily
recognized KanPaar directing the work inside. The kandra would take
the atium and would deliver it to Ruin. Sazed had to stop them. But
it was twenty against one—with Sazed having only one small
metalmind. It didn't seem like good odds for him.
However, then Sazed
noticed something sitting outside the doors of the Trust-warren. A
simple cloth sack, of little note save for the fact that Sazed
recognized it. He'd carried his metalminds in it for years. They must
have tossed it there after taking Sazed captive. It lay about twenty
feet down the corridor from him, right beside the doorway into the
Trustwarren.
In the other room,
KanPaar looked up, staring directly toward Sazed's position. Ruin had
noticed him.
Sazed didn't pause
to think further. He reached into his pocket, grabbed the steel lock,
and tapped it. He rushed through the corridor on inhumanly quick
feet, snatching his sack from the ground as kandra began to cry out.
Sazed snapped open
the sack, and found a collection of bracelets, rings, and bracers
inside. He dumped them out, spilling the precious metalminds to the
floor and grabbed two particular ones. Then, still moving at blurring
speed, he dashed to the side.
His steelmind ran
out. One of the rings he'd grabbed was pewter. He tapped it for
strength, growing in size and bulk. Then, he slammed the doors to the
Trustwarren closed, causing those now trapped inside to cry out in
shock. Finally, he tapped the other ring—this one iron. He grew
several times heavier, making himself into a doorstop, holding the
massive metal doors to the Trustwarren closed.
It was a delaying
tactic. He stood, holding the doors shut, his metalminds depleting at
an alarming rate. They were the same rings he'd worn at the siege of
Luthadel, the ones that had been embedded within him. He'd
replenished them following the siege, before he'd given up Feruchemy.
They would not last long. What would he do when the kandra burst
through the door? He searched desperately for a way to bar or block
the portal, but could see nothing. And, if he let go for even a
moment, the kandra inside would burst free.
"Please,"
he whispered, hoping that—like before—the thing that
listened would give him a miracle. "I'm going to need help. . .
."
"I swear it
was him, my lord," said the soldier, a man named Rittle. "I've
believed in the Church of the Survivor since the day of Kelsier's own
death, my lord. He preached to me, converted me to the rebellion. I
was there when he visited the caves and had Lord Demoux fight for his
honor. I'd know Kelsier like I'd know my father. It was the
Survivor."
Elend turned to the
other soldier, who nodded in agreement. "I didn't know him, my
lord," said this man. "However, he matched the
descriptions. I think it was really him, I do."
Elend turned to
Demoux, who nodded. "They described Lord Kelsier very
accurately, my lord. He is watching over us."
Elend . .
. .
A messenger arrived
and whispered something to Demoux. The night was dark, and in the
torchlight, Elend turned to study the two soldiers who had seen
Kelsier. They didn't look like highly reliable witnesses—Elend
hadn't exactly left his best soldiers behind when he'd gone
campaigning. Still, others had apparently seen the Survivor too.
Elend would want to speak with them.
He shook his head.
And, where in the world was Vin?
Elend . .
. .
"My lord,"
Demoux said, touching his arm, looking concerned. Elend dismissed the
two soldier witnesses. Accurate or not, he owed them a great
debt—they had saved many lives with their preparation.
"Scout's
report, my lord," Demoux said, face illuminated by a pole-top
torch flickering in the night breeze. "Those koloss you saw,
they are heading this way. Moving quickly. Scouts saw them
approaching in the distance from a hilltop. They . . . could be here
before the night is over."
Elend cursed
quietly.
Elend . .
. .
He frowned. Why did
he keep hearing his name on the wind? He turned, looking into the
darkness. Something was pulling him, guiding him, whispering to him.
He tried to ignore it, turning back to Demoux. And yet, it was there,
in his heart.
Come . . .
.
It seemed like
Vin's voice.
"Gather an
honor guard," Elend said, grabbing the torch by its shaft, then
throwing on an ashcloak and buttoning it down to his knees. Then, he
turned toward the darkness.
"My lord?"
Demoux said.
"Just do it!"
Elend said, striding off into the darkness.
Demoux called for
some soldiers, following in a hurry.
What am I
doing? Elend thought, pushing his way through the waist-deep
ash, using the cloak to keep his uniform somewhat clean. Chasing
at dreams? Maybe I'm going mad .
He could see
something in his mind. A hillside with a hole in it. A memory,
perhaps? Had he come this way before? Demoux and his soldiers
followed quietly, looking apprehensive.
Elend pushed
onward. He was almost—
He stopped. There
it was, the hillside. It would have been indistinguishable from the
others around it, except there were tracks leading up to it. Elend
frowned, pushing forward through the deep ash, moving to the point
where the tracks ended. There, he found a hole in the ground, leading
down.
A cave, he
thought. Perhaps . . . a place for my people to hide?
It wouldn't be big
enough for that, likely. Still, the caves Kelsier had used for his
rebellion had been large enough to hold some ten thousand men.
Curious, Elend poked down into the cave, walking down its steep
incline, throwing off the cloak. Demoux and his men followed with
curiosity.
The tunnel went
down for a bit, and Elend was surprised to find that there was light
coming from ahead. Immediately, he flared pewter, growing tense. He
tossed aside his torch, then burned tin, enhancing his vision. He
could see several poles that glowed blue at the top. They appeared to
be made of rock.
What in the
world . . .?
He moved forward
quickly, motioning for Demoux and his men to follow. The tunnel led
to a vast cavern. Elend stopped. It was as large as one of the
storage caverns. Larger, perhaps. Down below, something moved.
Mistwraiths? he
realized with surprise. Is this where they hide? In holes in the
ground?
He dropped a coin,
shooting himself through the poorly lit cavern to land on the stone
floor a distance away from Demoux and the others. The mistwraiths
weren't as large as others he had seen. And . . . why were they using
rocks and wood in place of bones?
He heard a sound.
Only tin-enhanced ears let him catch it, but it sounded distinctly
unlike a sound a mistwraith would make. Stone against metal. He waved
sharply to Demoux, then moved carefully down a side corridor.
At its end, he
stopped in surprise. A familiar figure stood against a pair of large
metal doors, grunting, apparently trying to hold them closed.
"Sazed?"
Elend asked, standing up straighter.
Sazed looked up,
saw Elend, and was apparently so surprised that he lost control of
the doors. They burst open, throwing the Terrisman aside, revealing a
group of angry, translucent-skinned kandra.
"Your
Majesty!" Sazed said. "Do not let them escape!"
Demoux and his
soldiers clanked up behind Elend. That's either Sazed, or a
kandra who ate his bones, Elend thought. He made a snap
decision. He'd trusted the voice in his ear. He'd trust that this was
Sazed.
The group of kandra
tried to get past Demoux's soldiers. However, the kandra weren't
particularly good warriors, and their weapons were made of metal. It
took Elend and Demoux all of about two minutes to subdue the group,
breaking their bones to keep them from healing and escaping.
Afterward, Elend
walked over to Sazed, who had stood up and dusted himself off. "How
did you find me, Your Majesty?"
"I honestly
don't know," Elend said. "Sazed, what is this place?"
"The Homeland
of the kandra people, Your Majesty," Sazed said. "And the
hiding place of the Lord Ruler's atium hoard."
Elend raised an
eyebrow, following Sazed's pointed finger. There was a room beyond
the doors, and a pit in the floor.
Great, Elend
thought. Now we find it .
"You don't
look too excited, Your Majesty," Sazed noted. "Kings,
armies, Mistborn—even Kelsier himself—have been searching
for this cache for years."
"It's
worthless," Elend said. "My people are starving, and they
can't eat metal. This cavern, however . . . it might prove useful.
What do you think, Demoux?"
"If there are
any other chambers like that first one, my lord, it could hold a
substantial percentage of our people."
"There are
four large caverns," Sazed said. "And four entrances that I
know of."
Elend turned to
Demoux. He was already giving orders to his soldiers. We have to
get the people down here before the sun rises, Elend thought,
remembering the heat. At the very least, before those koloss
arrive.
After that . . .
well, they would have to see. For now, Elend had only one goal.
Survival.

Snapping has
always been the dark side of Allomancy. A person's genetic endowment
may make them a potential Allomancer, but in order for the power to
manifest, the body must be put through extraordinary trauma. Though
Elend spoke of how terrible his beating was, during our day,
unlocking Allomancy in a person was easier than it had once been, for
we had the infusion of Preservation's power into the human bloodlines
via the nuggets granted to nobility by the Lord Ruler .
When
Preservation set up the mists, he was afraid of Ruin escaping his
prison. In those early days, before the Ascension, the mists began to
Snap people as they did during our time—but this action of the
mists was one of the only ways to awaken Allomancy in a person, for
the genetic attributes were buried too deeply to be brought out by a
simple beating. The mists of that day created Mistings only, of
course—there were no Mistborn until the Lord Ruler made use of
the nuggets .
The people
misinterpreted the mists' intent, as the process of Snapping
Allomancers caused some—particularly the young and the old—to
die. This hadn't been Preservation's desire, but he'd given up most
of his consciousness to form Ruin's prison, and the mists had to be
left to work as best they could without specific direction .
Ruin, subtle as
ever, knew that he couldn't stop the mists from doing their work.
However, he could do the unexpected and encourage them. And
so, he helped make them stronger. That brought death to the plants of
the world, and created the threat that became known as the Deepness .





81
VIN TURNED
TOWARD RUIN, projecting a smile. The cloud of twisting black
mist seemed agitated.
So, you can
influence a single minion, Ruin snapped, turning upon itself,
rising in the air. Vin followed, streaking up to loom over the entire
Central Dominance. Below, she could see Demoux's soldiers rushing to
the camp, waking the people, organizing them to flight. Already, some
of them were making their way along the tracks in the ash toward the
safety of the caverns.
She could feel the
sun, and knew that the planet was far too near it to be safe. Yet,
she could do nothing more. Not only would Ruin have stopped her, but
she didn't understand her power yet. She felt as the Lord Ruler must
have—almighty, yet clumsy. If she tried to move the world, she
would only make things worse.
But, she had
accomplished something. Ruin had his koloss pounding toward them at
breakneck speed, but they still wouldn't arrive at the Pits for
several hours. Plenty of time to get the people to the caverns.
Ruin must have
noticed what she was studying, or perhaps he sensed her smugness. You
think you've won? he asked, sounding amused. Why, because
you managed to stop a few kandra? They were always the weakest of the
minions the Lord Ruler created for me. I have made a habit of
ignoring them. Either way, Vin, you cannot really think that you have
beaten me.
Vin waited,
watching as the people fled to the relative safety of the caverns.
Even as the bulk of them arrived—soldiers separating them into
groups, sending them to the different entrances—her good humor
began to fade. She had managed to get through to Elend, and while it
had seemed like a great victory at the moment, she could now see that
it was little more than another stalling tactic.
Have you
counted the koloss in my army, Vin? Ruin asked. I've made
them from your people, you know. I've gathered hundreds of thousands
.
Vin focused,
enumerating instantly. He was telling the truth.
This is the
force I could have thrown at you at any time, Ruin said. Most
of them kept to the Outer Dominances, but I've been bringing them in,
marching them toward Luthadel. How many times must I tell you, Vin?
You can't win. You could never win. I've just been playing with you .
Vin pulled back,
ignoring his lies. He hadn't been playing with them—he'd been
trying to discover the secrets that Preservation had left, the secret
that the Lord Ruler had kept. Still, the numbers Ruin had finally
managed to marshal were awe-inspiring. There were far more koloss
than there were people climbing into the caverns. With a force like
that, Ruin could assault even a well-fortified position. And, by
Vin's count, Elend had fewer than a thousand men with any battle
training.
On top of that,
there was the sun and its destructive heat, the death of the world's
crops, the tainting of water and land with several feet of ash . . .
Even the lava flows, which she had stopped, were beginning again, her
plugging of the ashmounts having provided only a temporary solution.
A bad one, even. Now that the mountains couldn't erupt, great cracks
were appearing in the land, and the magma, the earth's burning blood,
was boiling out that way.
We're just so
far behind! Vin thought. Ruin had centuries to plan this.
Even when we thought we were being clever, we fell for his plots.
What good is it to sequester my people beneath the ground if they're
just going to starve?
She turned toward
Ruin, who sat billowing and shifting upon himself, watching his
koloss army. She felt a hatred that seemed incompatible with the
power she held. The hatred made her sick, but she didn't let go of
it.
This thing before
her . . . it would destroy everything she knew, everything she loved.
It couldn't understand love. It built only so that it could destroy.
At that moment, she reversed her earlier decision. She'd never again
call Ruin a "him." Humanizing the creature gave it too much
respect.
Seething, watching,
she didn't know what else to do. So, she attacked.
She wasn't even
certain how she did it. She threw herself at Ruin, forcing her power
up against its power. There was friction between them, a clash of
energy, and it tormented her divine body. Ruin cried out, and—mixing
with Ruin—she knew its mind.
Ruin was surprised.
It didn't expect Preservation to be able to attack. Vin's move
smacked too much of destruction. Ruin didn't know how to respond, but
it threw its power back against her in a protective reflex. Their
selves crashed, threatening to dissolve. Finally, Vin pulled back,
lacerated, rebuffed.
Their power was too
well matched. Opposite, yet similar. Like Allomancy.
Opposition,
Ruin whispered. Balance. You'll learn to hate it, I suspect,
though Preservation never could .
"So, this
is the body of a god?" Elend asked, rolling the bead of atium
around in his palm. He held it up next to the one that Yomen had
given him.
"Indeed, Your
Majesty," Sazed said. The Terrisman looked eager. Didn't he
understand how dangerous their situation was? Demoux's scouts—the
ones that had returned—reported that the koloss were only
minutes away. Elend had ordered his troops posted at the doorways to
the Homeland, but his hope—that the koloss wouldn't know where
to find his people—was a slim one, considering what Sazed had
told him about Ruin.
"Ruin can't
help but come for it," Sazed explained. They stood in the
metal-lined cavern called the Trustwarren, the place where the kandra
had spent the last thousand years gathering and guarding the atium.
"This atium is part of him. It's what he's been
searching for all this time."
"Which means
we'll have a couple hundred thousand koloss trying to climb down our
throats, Sazed," Elend said, handing back the bead of atium. "I
say we give it to him."
Sazed paled. "Give
it to him? Your Majesty, my apologies, but that would mean the end of
the world. Instantly. I am certain of it."
Great, Elend
thought.
"It will be
all right, Elend," Sazed said.
Elend frowned up at
the Terrisman, who stood peacefully in his robes.
"Vin will
come," Sazed explained. "She is the Hero of Ages—she
will arrive to save this people. Don't you see how perfect this all
is? It's arranged, planned. That you would come here, find me, at
this exact moment . . . That you'd be able to lead the people to
safety in these caverns . . . Well, it all fits together. She'll
come."
Interesting
time for him to get his faith back, Elend thought. He rolled
Yomen's bead between his fingers, thinking. Outside the room, he
could hear whispers. People—Terris stewards, skaa leaders, even
a few soldiers—stood listening. Elend could hear the anxiety in
their voices. They had heard of the approaching army. As Elend
watched, Demoux carefully pushed his way through them and entered the
room.
"Soldiers
posted, my lord," the general said.
"How many do
we have?" Elend asked.
Demoux looked grim.
"The two hundred and eighty I brought with me," he said.
"Plus about five hundred from the city. Another hundred ordinary
citizens that we armed with those kandra hammers, or spare weapons
from our soldiers. And, we have four different entrances to this
cavern complex we need to guard."
Elend closed his
eyes.
"She'll come,"
Sazed said.
"My lord,"
Demoux said, pulling Elend aside. "This is bad."
"I know,"
Elend said, exhaling softly. "Did you give the men metals?"
"What we could
find," Demoux said quietly. "The people didn't think to
bring powdered metal with them when they fled Luthadel. We've found a
couple of noblemen who were Allomancers, but they were only
Copperclouds or Seekers."
Elend nodded. He'd
bribed or pressed the useful nobleman Allomancers into his army
already.
"We gave those
metals to my soldiers," Demoux said. "But none of them
could burn them. Even if we had Allomancers, we cannot hold this
location, my lord! Not with so few soldiers, not against that many
koloss. We'll delay them at first, because of the narrow entrances.
But . . . well . . ."
"I realize
that, Demoux," Elend said with frustration. "But do you
have any other options?"
Demoux was silent.
"I was hoping you'd have some, my lord."
"None here,"
Elend said.
Demoux grew grim.
"Then we die."
"What about
faith, Demoux?" Elend asked.
"I believe in
the Survivor, my lord. But . . . well, this looks pretty bad. I've
felt like a man waiting his turn before the headsman ever since we
spotted those koloss. Maybe the Survivor doesn't want us to succeed
here. Sometimes, people just have to die."
Elend turned away,
frustrated, clenching and unclenching his fist around the bead of
atium. It was the same problem, the same trouble he always had. He'd
failed back during the siege of Luthadel—it had taken Vin to
protect the city. He'd failed in Fadrex City—only the koloss
getting distracted had rescued him there.
A ruler's most
basic duty was to protect his people. In this one area, Elend
continually felt impotent. Useless.
Why can't I do
it? Elend thought with frustration. I spend a year searching
out storage caverns to provide food, only to end up trapped with my
people starving. I search all that time looking for the atium—hoping
to use it to buy safety for my people—and then I find it too
late to spend it on anything .
Too late .
. . .
He paused, glancing
back toward the metal plate in the floor.
Years searching
for . . . atium .
None of the metals
Demoux had given his soldiers had worked. Elend had been working
under the assumption that Demoux's group would be like the other
mistfallen back in Urteau—that they'd be composed of all kinds
of Mistings. Yet, there had been something different about
Demoux's group. They had fallen sick for far longer than the others.
Elend pushed
forward, rushing past Sazed, grabbing a handful of beads. A vast
wealth, unlike anything any man had ever possessed. Valuable for its
rarity. Valuable for its economic power. Valuable for its Allomancy.
"Demoux,"
he snapped, rising and tossing the bead to him. "Eat this."
Demoux frowned. "My
lord?"
"Eat it,"
Elend said.
Demoux did as
asked. He stood for a moment.
Two hundred and
eighty men, Elend thought. Sent away from my army because of
all the ones who fell sick, they were the most sick. Sixteen
days .
Two hundred and
eighty men. One-sixteenth of those who fell sick. One out of sixteen
Allomantic metals .
Yomen had proven
that there was such a thing as an atium Misting. If Elend hadn't been
so distracted, he would have made the connection earlier. If one out
of sixteen who fell sick remained that way the longest, would that
not imply that they'd gained the most powerful of the sixteen
abilities?
Demoux looked up,
eyes widening.
And Elend smiled.
Vin hovered outside
the cavern, watching with dread as the koloss approached. They were
already in a blood frenzy—Ruin had that much control over them.
There were thousands upon thousands of them. The slaughter was about
to begin.
Vin cried out as
they drew closer, throwing herself against Ruin again, trying to
drive her power to destroy the thing. As before, she was rebuffed.
She felt herself screaming, trembling as she thought about the
impending deaths below. It would be like the tsunami deaths on the
coast, only worse.
For these were
people she knew. People she loved.
She turned back
toward the entrance. She didn't want to watch, but she wouldn't be
able to do anything else. Her self was everywhere. Even if she pulled
her nexus away, she knew that she'd still feel the deaths—that
they would make her tremble and weep.
From within the
cavern, echoing, she sensed a familiar voice. "Today, men, I ask
of you your lives." Vin hovered down, listening, though she
couldn't see into the cavern because of the metals in the rock. She
could hear, however. If she'd had eyes, she would have been crying,
she knew.
"I ask of you
your lives," Elend said, voice echoing, "and your courage.
I ask of you your faith, and your honor—your strength, and your
compassion. For today, I lead you to die. I will not ask you to
welcome this event. I will not insult you by calling it well, or
just, or even glorious. But I will say this.
"Each moment
you fight is a gift to those in this cavern. Each second we fight is
a second longer that thousands of people can draw breath. Each stroke
of the sword, each koloss felled, each breath earned is a victory! It
is a person protected for a moment longer, a life extended, an enemy
frustrated!"
There was a brief
pause.
"In the end,
they will kill us," Elend said, voice loud, ringing in the
cavern. "But first, they shall fear us!"
The men yelled at
this, and Vin's enhanced mind could pick out around two hundred and
fifty distinct voices. She heard them split, rushing toward the
different cavern entrances. A moment later, someone appeared from the
front entrance near her.
A figure in white
slowly stepped out into the ash, brilliant white cape fluttering. He
held a sword in one hand.
Elend! she
tried to cry at him. No! Go back! Charging them is madness!
You'll be killed!
Elend stood tall,
watching the waves of koloss as they approached, trampling down the
black ash, an endless sea of death with blue skin and red eyes. Many
carried swords, the others just bore rocks and lengths of wood. Elend
was a tiny white speck before them, a single dot on an endless canvas
of blue.
He raised his sword
high and charged.
ELEND!
Suddenly, Elend
burst with a brilliant energy, so bright that Vin gasped. He met the
first koloss head-on, ducking beneath the swinging sword and
decapitating the creature in one stroke. Then, instead of jumping
away, he spun to the side, swinging. Another koloss fell. Three
swords flashed around him, but all missed by just a breath. Elend
ducked to the side, taking a koloss in the stomach, then whipped his
sword around—his head barely passing beneath another swing—and
took off a koloss arm.
He still didn't
Push himself away. Vin froze, watching as he took down one koloss,
then beheaded another in a single, fluid stroke. Elend moved with a
grace she had never seen from him—she had always been the
better warrior, yet at this moment, he put her to shame. He wove
between koloss blades as if he were taking part in a prerehearsed
stage fight, body after body falling before his gliding blade.
A group of soldiers
in Elend's colors burst from the cavern entrance, charging. Like a
wave of light, their forms exploded with power. They, too, moved into
the koloss ranks, striking with incredible precision. Not a single
one of them fell as Vin watched. They fought with miraculous skill
and fortune, each koloss blade falling just a little too late. Blue
corpses began to pile up around the glowing force of men.
Somehow, Elend had
found an entire army who could burn atium.
Elend was a god.
He'd never burned
atium before, and his first experience with the metal filled him with
wonder. The koloss around him all emitted atium shadows—images
that moved before they did, showing Elend exactly what they would do.
He could see into the future, if only a few seconds. In a battle,
that was just what one needed.
He could feel the
atium enhancing his mind, making him capable of reading and using all
of the new information. He didn't even have to pause and think. His
arms moved of their own volition, swinging his sword with awesome
precision.
He spun amid a
cloud of phantom images, striking at flesh, feeling almost as if he
were in the mists again. No koloss could stand against him. He felt
energized—he felt amazing. For a time, he was invincible. He'd
swallowed so many atium beads he felt as if he'd throw up. For its
entire history, atium had been a thing that men had needed to save
and hoard. Burning it had seemed such a shame that it had been used
only sparingly, only in instances of great need.
Elend didn't need
to worry about any of that. He just burned as much as he wanted. And
it made him into a disaster for the koloss—a whirlwind of exact
strikes and impossible dodges, always a few steps ahead of his
opponents. Foe after foe fell before him. And, when he began to get
low on atium, he Pushed himself off a fallen sword back to the
entrance. There, with plenty of water to wash it down, Sazed waited
with another bag of atium.
Elend downed the
beads quickly, then returned to the battle.
Ruin raged and
spun, trying to stop the slaughter. Yet, this time, Vin was the force
of balance. She blocked Ruin's every attempt to destroy Elend and the
others, keeping it contained.
I can't decide
if you're a fool, Vin thought toward it, or if you simply
exist in a way that makes you incapable of considering some things .
Ruin screamed,
buffeting against her, trying to destroy her as she had tried to
destroy it. However, once again, their powers were too evenly
matched. Ruin was forced to pull back.
Life, Vin
said. You said that the only reason to create something was so
that you could destroy it .
She hovered beside
Elend, watching him fight. The deaths of the koloss should have
pained her. Yet, she did not think of the death. Perhaps it was the
influence of Preservation's power, but she saw only a man,
struggling, fighting, even when hope seemed impossible. She didn't
see death, she saw life. She saw faith.
We create
things to watch them grow, Ruin, she said. To take pleasure
in seeing that which we love become more than it was before. You said
that you were invincible—that all things break apart. All
things are Ruined. But there are things that fight against you—and
the ironic part is, you can't even understand those things. Love.
Life. Growth .
The life of a
person is more than the chaos of its passing. Emotion, Ruin. This is
your defeat .
Sazed watched
anxiously from the mouth of the cavern. A small group of men huddled
around him. Garv, leader of the Church of the Survivor in Luthadel.
Harathdal, foremost of the Terris stewards. Lord Dedri Vasting, one
of the surviving Assembly members from the city government. Aslydin,
the young woman whom Demoux had apparently come to love during his
few short weeks at the Pits of Hathsin. A smattering of others,
important—or faithful—enough to get near the front of the
crowd and watch.
"Where is she,
Master Terrisman?" Garv asked.
"She'll come,"
Sazed promised, hand resting on the rock wall. The men fell quiet.
Soldiers—those without the blessing of atium—waited
nervously with them, knowing they were next in line, should Elend's
assault fail.
She has to
come, Sazed thought. Everything points toward her arrival .
"The Hero will
come," he repeated.
Elend sheared
through two heads at once, dropping the koloss. He spun his blade,
taking off an arm, then stabbed another koloss through the neck. He
hadn't seen that one approaching, but his mind had seen and
interpreted the atium shadow before the real attack came.
Already he stood
atop of carpet of blue corpses. He did not stumble. With atium, his
every step was exact, his blade guided, his mind crisp. He took down
a particularly large koloss, then stepped back, pausing briefly.
The sun crested the
horizon in the east. It started to grow hotter.
They had been
fighting for hours, yet the army of koloss still seemed endless.
Elend slew another koloss, but his motions were beginning to feel
sluggish. Atium enhanced the mind, but it did not boost the body, and
he'd started to rely on his pewter to keep him going. Who would have
known that one could get tired—exhausted, even—while
burning atium? Nobody had ever used as much of the metal as Elend
had.
But he had to keep
going. His atium was running low. He turned back toward the mouth of
the cavern, just in time to see one of his atium soldiers go down in
a spray of blood.
Elend cursed,
spinning as an atium shadow passed through him. He ducked the swing
that followed, then took off the creature's arm. He beheaded the one
that followed, then cut another's legs out from beneath it. For most
of the battle, he hadn't used fancy Allomantic jumps or attacks, just
straightforward swordplay. His arms were growing tired, however, and
he was forced to begin Pushing koloss away from him to manage the
battlefield. The reserve of atium—of life—within
him was dwindling. Atium burned so quickly.
Another man
screamed. Another soldier dead.
Elend began to back
toward the cavern. There were just so many koloss. His band
of two hundred and eighty had slain thousands, yet the koloss didn't
care. They kept attacking, a brutal wave of endless determination,
resisted only by the pockets of atium Mistings protecting each of the
entrances to the Homeland.
Another man died.
They were running out of atium.
Elend screamed,
swinging his sword about him, taking down three koloss in a maneuver
that never should have worked. He flared steel and Pushed the rest
away from him.
The body of a
god, burning within me, he thought. He gritted his teeth,
attacking as more of his men fell. He scrambled up a pile of koloss,
slicing off arms, legs, heads. Stabbing chests, necks, guts. He
fought on, alone, his clothing long since stained from white to red.
Something moved
behind him, and he spun, raising his blade, letting the atium lead
him. Yet, he froze, uncertain. The creature behind him was no koloss.
It stood in a black robe, one eye socket empty and bleeding, the
other bearing a spike that had been crushed back into its skull.
Elend could see straight into the empty eye socket, through the
creature's head, and out the back.
Marsh. He had a
cloud of atium shadows around him—he was burning the metal too,
and would be immune to Elend's own atium.
Human led his
koloss soldiers through the tunnels. They killed any person in their
path.
Some had stood at
the entrance. They had fought long. They had been strong. They were
dead now.
Something drove
Human on. Something stronger than anything that had controlled him
before. Stronger than the little woman with the black hair, though
she had been very strong. This thing was stronger. It was Ruin. Human
knew this.
He could not
resist. He could only kill. He cut down another human.
Human burst into a
large open chamber filled with other little people. Controlling him,
Ruin made him turn away and not kill them. Not that Ruin didn't want
him to kill them. It just wanted something else more.
Human rushed
forward. He crawled over tumbled rocks and stones. He shoved aside
crying humans. Other koloss followed him. For the moment, all of his
own desires were forgotten. There was only his overpowering desire to
get to . . .
A small room.
There. In front of him. Human threw open the doors. Ruin yelled in
pleasure as he entered this room. It contained the thing Ruin wanted.
"Guess what I
found," Marsh growled, stepping up, Pushing against Elend's
sword. The weapon was ripped from his fingers, flying away. "Atium.
A kandra was carrying it, looking to sell it. Foolish creature."
Elend cursed,
ducking out of the way of a koloss swing, pulling his obsidian dagger
from the sheath at his leg.
Marsh stalked
forward. Men screamed—cursing, falling—as their atium
died out. Elend's soldiers were being overrun. The screams tapered
off as the last of his men guarding this entrance died. He doubted
the others would last much longer.
Elend's atium
warned him of attacking koloss, letting him dodge—barely—but
he couldn't kill them very effectively with the dagger. And, as the
koloss took his attention, Marsh struck with an obsidian axe. The
blade fell, and Elend leaped away, but the dodge left him off
balance.
Elend tried to
recover, but his metals were running low—not just his atium,
but his basic metals. Iron, steel, pewter. He hadn't been paying much
attention to them, since he had atium, but he'd been fighting for so
long now. If Marsh had atium, then they were equal—and without
basic metals, Elend would die.
An attack from the
Inquisitor forced Elend to flare pewter to get away. He cut down
three koloss with ease, his atium still helping him, but Marsh's
immunity was a serious challenge. The Inquisitor crawled over the
fallen bodies of koloss, scrambling toward Elend, his single
spikehead reflecting the too-bright light of the sun overhead.
Elend's pewter ran
out.
"You cannot
beat me, Elend Venture," Marsh said in a voice like gravel.
"We've killed your wife. I will kill you."
Vin .
Elend didn't believe it. Vin will come, he thought. She'll
save us .
Faith. It was a
strange thing to feel at that moment. Marsh swung.
Pewter and iron
suddenly flared to life within Elend. He didn't have time to think
about the oddity; he simply reacted, Pulling on his sword, which lay
stuck into the ground a distance away. It flipped through the air and
he caught it, swinging with a too-quick motion, blocking Marsh's axe.
Elend's body seemed to pulse, powerful and vast. He struck forward
instinctively, forcing Marsh backward across the ashen field. Koloss
backed away for the moment, shying from Elend, as if frightened. Or
awed.
Marsh raised a hand
to Push on Elend's sword, but nothing happened. It was . . . as if
something deflected the blow. Elend screamed, charging, beating back
Marsh with the strikes of his silvery weapon. The Inquisitor looked
shocked as it blocked with the obsidian axe, its motions too quick
for even Allomancy to explain. Yet Elend still forced him to retreat,
across fallen corpses of blue, ash stirring beneath a red sky.
A powerful peace
swelled in Elend. His Allomancy flared bright, though he knew the
metals inside of him should have burned away. Only atium remained,
and its strange power did not—could not—give him the
other metals. But it didn't matter. For a moment, he was embraced by
something greater. He looked up, toward the sun.
And he saw—just
briefly—an enormous figure in the air just above him. A
shifting, brilliant personage of pure white. Her hands held to his
shoulders with her head thrown back, white hair streaming, mist
flaring behind her like wings that stretched across the sky.
Vin, he
thought with a smile.
Elend looked back
down as Marsh screamed and leaped forward, attacking with his axe in
one hand, seeming to trail something vast and black like a cloak
behind him. Marsh raised his other hand across his face, as if to
shield his dead eyes from the image in the air above Elend.
Elend burned the
last of his atium, flaring it to life in his stomach. He raised his
sword in two hands and waited for Marsh to draw close. The Inquisitor
was stronger and was a better warrior. Marsh had the powers of both
Allomancy and Feruchemy, making him another Lord Ruler. This was not
a battle Elend could win. Not with a sword.
Marsh arrived, and
Elend thought he understood what it had been like for Kelsier to face
the Lord Ruler on that square in Luthadel, all those years ago. Marsh
struck with his axe; Elend raised his sword in return and prepared to
strike.
Then, Elend burned
duralumin with his atium.
Sight, Sound,
Strength, Power, Glory, Speed!
Blue lines sprayed
from his chest like rays of light. But those were all overshadowed by
one thing. Atium plus duralumin. In a flash of knowledge, Elend felt
a mind-numbing wealth of information. All became white around him as
knowledge saturated his mind.
"I see now,"
he whispered as the vision faded, and along with it his remaining
metals. The battlefield returned. He stood upon it, his sword
piercing Marsh's neck. It had gotten caught on the spikehead jutting
out of Marsh's back, between the shoulder blades.
Marsh's axe was
buried in Elend's chest.
The phantom metals
Vin had given him burned to life within Elend again. They took the
pain away. However, there was only so much that pewter could do, no
matter how high it was flared. Marsh ripped his axe free, and Elend
stumbled backward, bleeding, letting go of his sword. Marsh pulled
the blade free from his neck, and the wound vanished, healed by the
powers of Feruchemy.
Elend fell,
slumping into a pile of koloss bodies. He would have been dead
already, save for the pewter. Marsh stepped up to him, smiling. His
empty eye socket was wreathed in tattoos, the mark that Marsh had
taken upon himself. The price he had paid to overthrow the Final
Empire.
Marsh grabbed Elend
by the throat, pulling him back up. "Your soldiers are dead,
Elend Venture," the creature whispered. "Our koloss rampage
inside the kandra caverns. Your metals are gone. You have lost."
Elend felt his life
dripping away, the last trickle from an empty glass. He'd been here
before, back in the cavern at the Well of Ascension. He should have
died then and he'd been terrified. This time, oddly, he was not.
There was no regret. Just satisfaction.
Elend looked up at
the Inquisitor. Vin, like a glowing phantom, still hovered above them
both. "Lost?" Elend whispered. "We've won, Marsh."
"Oh, and how
is that?" Marsh asked, dismissive.
Human stood at the
side of the pit in the center of the cavern room. The pit where
Ruin's body had been. The place of victory.
Human stood,
dumbfounded, a group of other koloss stepping up to him, looking
equally confused.
The pit was empty.
"Atium,"
Elend whispered, tasting blood. "Where is the atium, Marsh?
Where do you think we got the power to fight? You came for that
atium? Well it's gone. Tell your master that! You think my
men and I expected to kill all of these koloss? There are tens of
thousands of them! That wasn't the point at all."
Elend's smile
widened. "Ruin's body is gone, Marsh. We burned it all away, the
others and I. You might be able to kill me, but you'll never
get what you came for. And that is why we win."
Marsh screamed in
anger, demanding the truth, but Elend had spoken it. The deaths of
the others meant that they had run out of atium. His men had fought
until it was gone, as Elend had commanded, burning away every last
bit.
The body of a god.
The power of a god. Elend had held it for a moment. More important,
he'd destroyed it. Hopefully, that would keep his people safe.
It's up to you
now, Vin, he thought, still feeling the peace of her touch upon
his soul. I've done what I can .
He smiled at Marsh
again, defiantly, as the Inquisitor raised his axe.
The axe took off
Elend's head.
Ruin raged and
thrashed about, enraged and destructive. Vin only sat quietly,
watching Elend's headless body slump back into the pile of blue
corpses.
How do you like
that! Ruin screamed. I killed him! I Ruined everything you
love! I took it from you!
Vin floated above
Elend's body, looking down. She reached out with incorporeal fingers,
touching his head, remembering how it had felt to use her power to
fuel his Allomancy. She didn't know what she had done. Something akin
to what Ruin did when it controlled the koloss, perhaps. Only
opposite. Liberating. Serene.
Elend was dead. She
knew that, and knew that there was nothing she could do. That brought
pain, true, but not the pain she had expected. I let him go long
ago, she thought, stroking his face. At the Well of
Ascension. Allomancy brought him back to me for a time.
She didn't feel the
pain or terror that she had known before, when she'd thought him
dead. This time, she felt only peace. These last few years had been a
blessing—an extension. She'd given Elend up to be his own man,
to risk himself as he wished, and perhaps to die. She would always
love him. But she would not cease to function because he was gone.
The opposite,
perhaps. Ruin floated directly above her, throwing down insults,
telling her how it would kill the others. Sazed. Breeze. Ham. Spook.
So few left of
the original crew, she thought. Kelsier dead so long ago.
Dockson and Clubs slaughtered at the Battle of Luthadel. Yeden dead
with his soldiers. OreSeur taken at Zane's command. Marsh, fallen to
become an Inquisitor. And the others who joined us, now gone as well.
Tindwyl, TenSoon, Elend . . .
Did Ruin think she
would let their sacrifices be for nothing? She rose, gathering her
power. She forced it against the power of Ruin, as she had the other
times. Yet, this time was different. When Ruin pushed back, she
didn't retreat. She didn't preserve herself. She drove onward.
The confrontation
made her divine body tremble in pain. It was the pain of a cold and
hot meeting, the pain of two rocks being smashed together and ground
to dust. Their forms undulated and rippled in a tempest of power.
And Vin drove on.
Preservation
could never destroy you! she thought, almost screaming it
against the agony. He could only protect. That's why he needed to
create humankind. All along, Ruin, this was part of his plan!
He didn't give
up part of himself, making himself weaker, simply so that he could
create intelligent life! He knew he needed something of both
Preservation and of Ruin. Something that could both protect and
destroy. Something that could destroy to protect .
He gave up his
power at the Well, and into the mists, giving it to us so that we
could take it. He always intended this to happen. You think this was
your plan? It was his. His all along .
Ruin cried out.
Still, she drove on.
You created the
thing that can kill you, Ruin, Vin said. And you just made
one huge final mistake. You shouldn't have killed Elend .
You see, he was
the only reason I had left to live .
She didn't shy
back, though the conflict of opposites ripped her apart. Ruin
screamed in terror as the force of her power completely melded with
Ruin's.
Her
consciousness—now formed and saturated with Preservation—moved
to touch that of Ruin. Neither would yield. And, with a surge of
power, Vin bid farewell to the world, then pulled Ruin into the abyss
with her.
Their two minds
puffed away, like mist under a hot sun.

Once Vin died,
the end came quickly. We were not prepared for it—but even all
of the Lord Ruler's planning could not have prepared us for this. How
did one prepare for the end of the world itself?





82
SAZED
WATCHED QUIETLY from the mouth of the cavern. Outside, the
koloss raged and stomped about, looking confused. Most of the men who
had been watching with Sazed had fled. Even most of the soldiers had
retreated into the caverns, calling him a fool for waiting. Only
General Demoux, who had managed to crawl back to the cavern after his
atium ran out, remained, just a few steps into the tunnel. The man
was bloody, his arm ending in a tourniquet, his leg crushed. He
coughed quietly, waiting for Aslydin to return with more bandages.
Outside, the sun
rose into the sky. The heat was incredible, like an oven. Cries of
pain echoed from deep within the cavern behind Sazed. Koloss were
inside.
"She'll come,"
Sazed whispered.
He could see
Elend's body. It had fallen back down the pile of koloss corpses. It
was stark, bright white and red against the black and blue of the
koloss and ash.
"Vin will
come," Sazed said insistently.
Demoux looked
dazed. Too much blood lost. He slumped back, closing his eyes. Koloss
began to move toward the cavern mouth, though they didn't have the
direction or frenzy they'd displayed before.
"The Hero will
come!" Sazed said.
Outside, something
appeared, as if from mists, then slumped down in the bodies beside
Elend's corpse. It was followed immediately by something else, a
second figure, which also fell motionless.
There! Sazed
thought, scrambling out of the cavern. He dashed past several koloss.
They tried to swing for him, but Sazed wore his metalminds. He felt
he should have his copperminds to use in case he needed to record
something important. He wore his ten rings, the ones he'd used to
fight during the siege of Luthadel, for he knew that he might need
them.
He tapped a bit of
steel and dodged the koloss attacks. He moved quickly through the
mass of confused-looking koloss, climbing over bodies, moving up to
the scrap of white cloak that marked Elend's resting place. His
corpse was there, headless.
A small body lay
beside his. Sazed fell to his knees, grabbing Vin by the shoulders.
Beside her, atop the pile of dead koloss, lay another body. It was
that of a man with red hair, one whom Sazed did not recognize, but he
ignored it.
For Vin was not
moving.
No! he
thought, checking for a pulse. There was none. Her eyes were closed.
She looked peaceful, but very, very dead.
"This can not
be!" he yelled, shaking her body again. Several koloss lumbered
toward him.
He glanced upward.
The sun was rising. It was getting hard to breathe for the heat. He
felt his skin burning. By the time the sun reached its zenith, it
would likely be so hot the land would burn.
"Is this how
it ends?" he screamed toward the sky. "Your Hero is dead!
Ruin's power may be broken, the koloss may be lost to him as an army,
but the world will still die!"
The ash had killed
the plants. The sun would burn away anything that remained. There was
no food. Sazed blinked out tears, but they dried on his face.
"This is how
you leave us?" he whispered.
And then, he felt
something. He looked down. Vin's body was smoking slightly. Not from
the heat. It seemed to be leaking something . . . or, no. It was
connected to something. The twists of mist he saw, they led to a vast
white light. He could just barely see it.
He reached out and
touched the mist, and felt an awesome power. A power of stability. To
the side, the other corpse—the one he didn't recognize—was
also leaking something. A deep black smoke. Sazed reached out with
his other hand, touching the smoke, and felt a different power—more
violent. The power of change.
He knelt, stunned,
between the bodies. And, only then, did it start to make sense.
The prophecies
always used the gender-neutral, he thought. So that they
could refer to either a man or a woman, we assumed. Or . . . perhaps
because they referred to a Hero who wasn't really either one?
He stood up. The
sun's power overhead felt insignificant compared to the twin—yet
opposite—powers that surrounded him.
The Hero would
be rejected of his people, Sazed thought. Yet, he would save
them. Not a warrior, though he would fight. Not born a king, but
would become one anyway .
He looked upward
again.
Is this what
you planned all along?
He tasted of the
power, but drew back, daunted. How could he use such a thing? He was
just a man. In the brief glimpse of forces that he touched, he knew
that he'd have no hope of using it. He didn't have the training.
"I can't do
this," he said through cracked lips, reaching to the sky. "I
don't know how. I cannot make the world as it was—I never saw
it. If I take this power, I will do as the Lord Ruler did, and will
only make things worse for my trying. I am simply a man."
Koloss cried out in
pain from the burning. The heat was terrible, and around Sazed, trees
began to pop and burst into flames. His touch on the twin powers kept
him alive, he knew, but he did not embrace them.
"I am no
Hero," he whispered, still reaching to the sky.
His arms twinkled,
golden. His copperminds, worn on his forearms, reflected the light of
the sun. They had been with him for so long, his companions. His
knowledge.
Knowledge. . . .
The words of
the prophecy were very precise, he thought suddenly. They
say . . . they say that the Hero will bear the future of the world on
his arms .
Not on his
shoulders. Not in his hands . On his arms.
By the
Forgotten Gods!
He slammed his arms
into the twin mists and seized the powers offered to him. He drew
them in, feeling them infuse his body, making him burn. His flesh and
bones evaporated, but as they did, he tapped his copperminds, dumping
their entire contents into his expanding consciousness.
The copperminds,
now empty, dropped with his rings to the pile of blue corpses beside
the bodies of Vin, Elend, and Ruin's nameless body. Sazed opened eyes
as large as the world itself, drawing in power that latticed all of
creation.
The Hero will
have the power to save the world. But he will also have the power to
destroy it .
We never
understood. He wouldn't simply bear the power of Preservation. He
needed the power of Ruin as well .
The powers were
opposites. As he drew them in, they threatened to annihilate each
other. And yet, because he was of one mind on how to use them, he
could keep them separate. They could touch without
destroying each other, if he willed it. For these two powers had been
used to create all things. If they fought, they destroyed. If they
were used together, they created.
Understanding
swelled within him. Over a thousand years, the Keepers had collected
the knowledge of mankind and stored it in their copperminds. They had
passed it down from Keeper to Keeper, each man or woman carrying the
entire bulk of knowledge, so that he or she could pass it on when
necessary. Sazed had it all.
And, in a moment of
transcendence, he understood it all. He saw the patterns, the clues,
the secrets. Men had believed and worshipped for as long as they had
existed, and within those beliefs, Sazed found the answers he needed.
Gems, hidden from Ruin in all the religions of mankind.
There had been a
people called the Bennett. They had considered mapmaking to be a
solemn duty; Sazed had once preached their religion to Kelsier
himself. From their detailed maps and charts, Sazed discovered how
the world had once looked. He used his powers to restore the
continents and oceans, the islands and coastlines, the mountains and
rivers.
There had been a
people known as the Nelazan. They had worshipped the stars, had
called them the Thousand Eyes of their god, Trell, watching them.
Sazed remembered well offering the religion to the young Vin while
she had sat, captive, undergoing her first haircut with the crew.
From the Nelazan, the Keepers had recovered star charts, and had
dutifully recorded them—even though scholars had called them
useless, since they hadn't been accurate since the days before the
Ascension. Yet, from these star charts, and from the patterns and
movements of the other planets in the solar system they outlined,
Sazed could determine exactly where the world was supposed to sit in
orbit. He put the planet back into its old place—not pushing
too hard, as the Lord Ruler once had, for he had a frame of reference
by which to measure.
There had been a
people known as the Canzi who had worshipped death; they had provided
detailed notes about the human body. Sazed had offered one of their
prayers over the bodies they had found in Vin's old crew hideout,
back when Kelsier had still lived. From the Canzi teachings about the
body, Sazed determined that the physiology of mankind had
changed—either by the Lord Ruler's intention or by simple
evolution—to adapt to breathing ash and eating brown plants. In
a wave of power, Sazed restored the bodies of men to the way they had
been before, leaving each person the same, yet fixing the problems
that living for a thousand years on a dying world had caused. He
didn't destroy men, warping and twisting them as the Lord Ruler had
when he'd created the kandra, for Sazed had a guide by which to work.
He learned other
things too. Dozens of secrets. One religion worshipped animals, and
from it Sazed drew forth pictures, explanations, and references
regarding the life that should have lived on the earth. He
restored it. From another—Dadradah, the religion he had
preached to Clubs before the man died—Sazed learned about
colors and hues. It was the last religion Sazed had ever taught, and
with its poems about color and nature, he could restore the plants,
sky, and landscape to the way they had once been. Every religion had
clues in it, for the faiths of men contained the hopes, loves,
wishes, and lives of the people who had believed them.
Finally, Sazed took
the religion of the Larsta, the religion that Kelsier's wife—Mare—had
believed in. Its priests had composed poetry during their times of
meditation. From these poems—and from a scrap of paper that
Mare had given to Kelsier, who had given it to Vin, who had given it
to Sazed—he learned of the beautiful things that the world had
once held.
And he restored
flowers to the plants that had once borne them.
The religions
in my portfolio weren't useless after all, he thought, the power
flowing from him and remaking the world. None of them were. They
weren't all true .
But they all
had truth .
Sazed hovered over
the world, changing things as he felt he must. He cradled the hiding
places of mankind, keeping the caverns safe—even if he did move
them about—as he reworked the world's tectonics. Finally, he
exhaled softly, his work finished. And yet, the power did not
evaporate from him, as he had expected it to.
Rashek and Vin
only touched small pieces of it at the Well of Ascension, he
realized. I have something more. Something endless .
Ruin and
Preservation were dead, and their powers had been joined together. In
fact, they belonged together. How had they been split? Someday,
perhaps, he would discover the answer to that question.
Somebody would need
to watch over the world, care for it, now that its gods were gone. It
wasn't until that moment that Sazed understood the term Hero of Ages.
Not a Hero that came once in the ages.
But a Hero who
would span the ages. A Hero who would preserve mankind throughout all
its lives and times. Neither Preservation nor Ruin, but both.
God.

Vin was
special.
Preservation
chose her from a very young age, as I have mentioned. I believe that
he was grooming her to take his power. Yet, the mind of Preservation
was very weak at that point, reduced only to the fragment that we
knew as the mist spirit .
What made him
choose this girl? Was it because she was a Mistborn? Was it because
she had Snapped so early in life, coming to her powers even as she
went through the pains of the unusually difficult labor her mother
went through to bear her?
Vin was
unusually talented and strong with Allomancy, even from the
beginning. I believe that she must have drawn some of the mist into
her when she was still a child, in those brief times when she wasn't
wearing the earring. Preservation had mostly gotten her to stop
wearing it by the time Kelsier recruited her, though she put it back
in for a moment before joining the crew. Then, she'd left it there at
his suggestion.
Nobody else
could draw upon the mists. I have determined this. Why were they open
to Vin and not others? I suspect that she couldn't have taken them
all in until after she'd touched the power at the Well of Ascension.
It was always meant, I believe, to be something of an attuning force.
Something that, once touched, would adjust a person's body to be able
to accept the mists.
Yet, she did
make use of a small crumb of Preservation's power when she defeated
the Lord Ruler, a year before she even began hearing the thumping of
the power's return to the Well.
There is much
more to this mystery. Perhaps I will tease it out eventually, as my
mind grows more and more accustomed to its expanded nature. Perhaps I
will determine why I was able to take the powers myself. For now, I
only wish to make a simple acknowledgment of the woman who held the
power just before me.
Of all of us
who touched it, I feel she was the most worthy.






EPILOGUE
SPOOK AWOKE
FROM THE NIGHTMARE, then sat up. The cavern around him was
dark, lit only by candles and lamps.
He stood,
stretching. Around him, people gasped. He walked past them, seeking
out his friends. The cavern was packed—holding everyone from
Urteau who had been willing to come and hide. As such, it was
difficult for Spook to pick his way through the shuffling, coughing,
chatting bodies. As he walked, the whispers grew louder, and people
stood, following.
Beldre came running
up to him, wearing a white dress. "Spook?" she asked with
wonder. "What . . . what happened?"
He just smiled,
putting his arm around her. They made their way to the front of the
cavern. Breeze sat at a table—of course, he would have
furniture, while pretty much everyone else sat on the rock floor.
Spook smiled at him, and the Soother raised an eyebrow.
"You're
looking well, my boy," Breeze said, taking a drink of his wine.
"You could say
that," Spook said.
"That's all
you're going to say?" Beldre said to Breeze. "Look at him!
He's been healed!"
Breeze shrugged,
putting down his wine and standing. "My dear, with all the
oddities that have been happening lately, young Spook's appearance
doesn't measure up. A simple healing? Why, that's rather mundane, if
you ask me."
Breeze smiled,
catching Spook's eye.
"Shall we
then?" Spook asked.
Breeze shrugged.
"Why not? What do you think that we'll find?"
"I'm not
sure," Spook admitted, stepping into the antechamber beyond the
cavern. He started to climb the ladder.
"Spook,"
Beldre said warily. "You know what the scouts said. The entire
city was burning from the heat of the sun. . . ."
Spook looked up,
noting the light shining between the cracks of the trapdoor. He
smiled, then pushed it open.
There was no city
outside. Just a field of grass. Green grass. Spook blinked at the
strange sight, then crawled out onto the soft earth, making room for
Breeze. The Soother's head popped out, then cocked to the side. "Now,
there's a sight," he said, crawling out beside Spook.
Spook stood up in
the grass. It came up to his thighs. Green. Such a strange color for
plants.
"And . . . the
sky," Breeze said, shading his eyes. "Blue. Not a hint of
ash or smoke. Very odd. Very odd indeed. I'll bet Vin had something
to do with this mess. That girl never could do things the
proper way."
Spook heard a gasp
from behind, and turned to see Beldre climbing out of the cavern. He
helped her step up onto the ground, then they walked in silent wonder
through the tall grass. The sun was so bright overhead, yet it wasn't
uncomfortably hot.
"What happened
to the city?" Beldre whispered, holding Spook's arm.
He shook his head.
Then, however, he heard something. He turned, thinking he saw motion
on the horizon. He walked forward, Beldre at his side, Breeze calling
down for Allrianne to come up and see what had happened.
"Are those . .
. people?" Beldre asked, finally seeing what Spook had. The
people in the distance saw them, too, and as soon as they drew close,
Spook smiled and waved at one.
"Spook?"
Ham called. "Kid, is that you?"
Spook and Beldre
hurried forward. Ham stood with others, and behind them Spook could
see another trapdoor in the middle of the grassy meadow floor. People
he didn't recognize—some wearing uniforms from Elend's
army—were climbing out. Ham rushed over, wearing his usual vest
and trousers, and grabbed Spook in an embrace.
"What are you
doing here?" Ham asked, letting go.
"I don't
know," Spook said. "Last I knew, I was in Urteau."
Ham looked up at
the sky. "I was in Fadrex! What happened?"
Spook shook his
head. "I don't know if the places we used to know have meaning
anymore, Ham. . . ."
Ham nodded, turning
as one of the soldiers pointed. Another batch of people was emerging
from a hole a short distance away. Spook and Ham walked forward—at
least, until Ham saw someone in the other batch of people. Spook
vaguely recognized her as Ham's wife, who had been back in Luthadel.
The Thug let out a cry of excitement, then rushed forward to greet
his family.
Spook made his way
from hole to hole. There appeared to be six of them, some well
populated, others not so much. One stood out. It wasn't a trapdoor,
like the others, but a slanted cave entrance. Here, he found General
Demoux speaking with a small group of people, a pretty Terriswoman
holding his arm.
"I was in and
out of consciousness for it," Demoux was saying, "but I saw
him. The Survivor. It had to be him—hanging in the
sky, glowing. Waves of color moved through the air, and the ground
trembled, the land spinning and moving. He came. Just like Sazed said
he would."
"Sazed?"
Spook spoke up, Demoux noticing him for the first time. "Where
is he?"
Demoux shook his
head. "I don't know, Lord Spook." Then he paused. "Where
did you come from, anyway?"
Spook ignored the
question. The openings and holes formed a pattern. Spook walked
through the thick grass, leading Beldre, making his way to the very
center of the pattern. The wind blew softly, bending the stalks of
grass in wave-like undulations. Ham and Breeze rushed to catch up to
him, already arguing about something trivial, Ham with a child on one
arm, his other around his wife's shoulders.
Spook froze as he
caught sight of a bit of color in the grass. He held up a hand,
warning the others, and they stepped forward more quietly. There, in
the center of the grass, was a field of . . . somethings. Colorful
somethings, growing from the ground, with tops like bright-colored
leaves. They were shaped like upside-down bells, with long straight
stalks, the petals at the top open toward the sun. As if reaching for
its light and gaping to drink it in.
"Beautiful . .
." Beldre whispered.
Spook stepped
forward, moving among the plants. Flowers, he thought,
recognizing them from the picture Vin had carried. Kelsier's
dream finally came true.
At the center of
the flowers, he found two people. Vin lay wearing her customary
mistcloak, shirt, and trousers. Elend was in a brilliant white
uniform, complete with cape. They were holding hands as they lay amid
the flowers.
And they were both
dead.
Spook knelt beside
them, listening to Ham and Breeze cry out. They examined the bodies,
checking for vital signs, but Spook focused on something else, almost
hidden in the grass. He picked it up—a large leather tome.
He opened it,
reading the first page.
I am,
unfortunately, the Hero of Ages, read the delicate, careful
letters. Spook thought he recognized the handwriting. As he flipped
through the book, a slip of paper fell free. Spook picked it up—one
side had a faded drawing of a flower, the very picture he'd been
thinking about moments before. On the other side was a note scrawled
in the same handwriting as the book.
Spook, it
read. I tried to bring them back, but apparently fixing the
bodies doesn't return the souls. I will get better at this with time,
I expect. However, be assured that I have spoken with our friends,
and they are quite happy where they are. They deserve a rest, I
think.
The book
contains a short record of the events that led up to the world dying
and being reborn, along with some musings I have made about the
history, philosophy, and science of recent occurrences. If you look
to your right, you will find a much larger group of books in the
grass. These contain all of the knowledge—repeated
verbatim—that was contained in my metalminds. Let the knowledge
of the past not be forgotten.
Rebuilding will
be difficult, I think—but likely far easier than living beneath
the Lord Ruler or surviving Ruin's attempt to destroy the world. I
think you'll be surprised at the number of people who fled to the
storage caverns. Rashek planned very well for this day. He suffered
much beneath Ruin's hand, but he was a good man, who ultimately had
honorable intentions.
You did well.
Know that the message you sent via Captain Goradel saved us all, in
the end. The people will need leadership in the years to come.
Likely, they will look to you. I'm sorry that I cannot be there in
person to help you, but know that I am . . . about.
I have made you
Mistborn, and healed the damage you did to your body by flaring tin
so much. I hope you don't mind. It was Kelsier's request, actually.
Consider it a parting gift from him.
Watch over them
for me.
P.S. There are
still two metals that nobody knows about. You might want to poke
about and see if you can figure out what they are. I think they'll
interest you.
Spook looked up,
staring at the strangely empty, blue sky. Beldre came over and knelt
beside him, looking over his paper, then giving him a quizzical look.
"You look
troubled," she said.
Spook shook his
head. "No," he said, folding up the little slip of paper
and putting it in his pocket. "No, I'm not troubled. In fact, I
actually think everything is going to be all right. Finally."




